arXiv:2306.10715v6 [cs.MA] 12 Mar 2025  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                        MAXIMUM ENTROPY HETEROGENEOUS-AGENT
                                        REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

                                          Jiarong Liu1,Yifan Zhong1,2, Siyi Hu3,
                                          Haobo Fu4, Qiang Fu4, Xiaojun Chang3, Yaodong Yang1
                                          1Institute for AI, Peking University, 2National Key Laboratory of General AI, BIGAI,
                                          3University of Technology Sydney, 4Tencent AI Lab

                                                                                   ABSTRACT

                                                   Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has been shown effective for coop-
                                                   erative games in recent years. However, existing state-of-the-art methods face
                                                   challenges related to sample complexity, training instability, and the risk of con-
                                                   verging to a suboptimal Nash Equilibrium. In this paper, we propose a unified
                                                   framework for learning stochastic policies to resolve these issues. We embed
                                                   cooperative MARL problems into probabilistic graphical models, from which
                                                   we derive the maximum entropy (MaxEnt) objective for MARL. Based on the
                                                   MaxEnt framework, we propose Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Actor-Critic (HASAC)
                                                   algorithm. Theoretically, we prove the monotonic improvement and convergence
                                                   to quantal response equilibrium (QRE) properties of HASAC. Furthermore, we
                                                   generalize a unified template for MaxEnt algorithmic design named Maximum
                                                   Entropy Heterogeneous-Agent Mirror Learning (MEHAML), which provides any
                                                   induced method with the same guarantees as HASAC. We evaluate HASAC on six
                                                   benchmarks: Bi-DexHands, Multi-Agent MuJoCo, StarCraft Multi-Agent Chal-
                                                   lenge, Google Research Football, Multi-Agent Particle Environment, and Light
                                                   Aircraft Game. Results show that HASAC consistently outperforms strong base-
                                                   lines, exhibiting better sample efficiency, robustness, and sufficient exploration.

                                        1 INTRODUCTION

                                        Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is a complex problem characterized by the
                                        difficulty of coordinating individual agent policy improvements to enhance overall performance of
                                        the entire team. As a result, traditional independent learning methods in MARL often lead to poor
                                        convergence properties (30; 3). To alleviate these difficulties, the centralized training decentralized
                                        execution (CTDE) paradigm (5; 19) assumes that global states and teammates' actions and policies
                                        are accessible during the training phase. This approach leads to the development of competent
                                        multi-agent policy gradient algorithms (40; 37; 38; 43; 42) as well as value decomposition algorithms
                                        (27; 24; 41; 26; 33) . Furthermore, heterogeneous-agent mirror learning (HAML) (15) provides a
                                        template for rigorous algorithmic design, which guarantees any induced algorithm of monotonic
                                        improvement of joint objective and convergence to Nash equilibrium (NE) (22).

                                        Despite the theoretical soundness of the HAML framework, HAML-derived algorithms suffer from
                                        two main challenges. First, these methods face challenges attributed to either sample complexity or
                                        training instability. On-policy algorithms, including HAPPO and HATRPO (13), require new sample
                                        data for each gradient step, which becomes very expensive as task complexity and agent numbers
                                        increase. Off-policy algorithms, on the other hand, observe training instability and hyperparameter
                                        sensitivity (45). Moreover, HAML-derived algorithms suffer from insufficient exploration, which
                                        can lead to suboptimal NE convergence. This is primarily due to the standard MARL objective they
                                        maximize, where there always exists a deterministic convergence solution (15; 28) and stochasticity is
                                        not inherently encouraged. Since the presence of multiple NEs is a frequently observed phenomenon
                                        in many multi-agent games, these methods can fail to explore sufficiently and prematurely converge
                                        to a suboptimal NE, as we will show in Section 3.2.

                                        A possible solution to these challenges is to let agents learn stochastic behaviors in a sample-efficient
                                        way. Similar to the case of single-agent RL (7), in cooperative MARL problems, stochastic policies
                                        enable effective exploration of the reward landscape, mastery of multiple ways of performing the

                                            Equal contribution. Work done during internship at Institute for AI, Peking University. Corresponding to
                                        <yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn>. See our page at https://sites.google.com/view/meharl.

                                                                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

task, and robustness when facing prediction errors (46). Unfortunately, while a number of methods
have achieved great success in single-agent RL settings (46; 7; 9; 17), solving such stochastic
policy learning problems in cooperative MARL is challenging. Existing CTDE methods offer no
convergence guarantee for learning stochastic policies in general cases. Recently, FOP (44) applies
maximum entropy framework to multi-agent settings via value decomposition. However, FOP only
provides convergence to the global optimum when a task satisfies the Individual-Global-Optimal
(IGO) assumption, which limits its applicability in general cooperative MARL problems.

In this paper, we propose the first theoretically-justified actor-critic framework for learning stochastic
policies in cooperative MARL. Firstly, we model cooperative MARL as a probabilistic graphical
inference problem (Figure 2), where stochastic policies arise as optimal solutions. Performing
variational inference in this model leads us to derive the maximum entropy (MaxEnt) MARL objective.
To maximize this objective, we introduce heterogeneous-agent soft policy iteration (HASPI) which
ensures the properties of monotonic improvement and convergence to quantal response equilibrium
(QRE), which is the solution concept corresponding to stochastic policies in game theory (20; 6).
The key insight behind this theory is the joint soft policy decomposition proposition. Based on
HASPI, we derive the heterogeneous-agent soft actor-critic (HASAC) algorithm. Furthermore, we
generalize the HASPI procedure to the Maximum Entropy Heterogeneous-Agent Mirror Learning
(MEHAML) template, which offers a unified solution to MaxEnt MARL problems and provides the
same theoretical guarantees for any induced methods as HASAC. We test HASAC on six benchmarks:
Multi-Agent MuJoCo (MAMuJoCo) (4), Bi-DexHands (2), StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC)
(25), Google Research Football (GRF) (16), Multi-Agent Particle Environment (MPE) (19), and
Light Aircraft Game (LAG) (23). Across the majority of benchmark tasks, HASAC consistently
outperforms strong baselines, exhibiting the advantages of stochastic policies, namely improved
robustness, higher sample efficiency, and sufficient exploration.

2 RELATED WORK

Multi-agent policy gradient (MAPG) methods have been shown effective for multi-agent cooperation
tasks (5; 19). Yu et al. (42) discovers the effectiveness of PPO in multi-agent scenarios and introduces
MAPPO. It inspires CoPPO (39), which preserves monotonic improvement property with a simul-
taneous update scheme, HAPPO / HATRPO (13), which proves monotonic improvement and NE
convergence property with a sequential update scheme, and A2PO (34), which preserves per-agent
monotonic improvement property. Guarantees of HAPPO / HATRPO are enhanced by HAML (15),
which abstracts a general theoretical framework and leads to several practical algorithms. While these
methods are effective on challenging benchmarks, we show in Section 3.2 that due to the standard
objective they optimize, they tend to converge rapidly to a suboptimal NE when in proximity to it.
Notably, the idea of NE can be considered as a notion of local optimum in cooperative MARL settings,
and has been studied in many prior works (29; 36; 13; 15). To alleviate suboptimal NE convergence
problem, we propose to learn stochastic policies, which maximize the MaxEnt MARL objective that
we derive from probabilistic graphical models. We adopt QRE (20; 6; 11) as the solution concept in
MaxEnt MARL framework, which generalizes NE when payoffs are perturbed by additional noise.

MaxEnt algorithms have achieved great success in single-agent RL. SQL (7) and SAC (8) learn
optimal MaxEnt policies through soft Q-iteration and soft policy iteration respectively. They refresh
SOTA performance, showcasing the robustness and effective exploration of stochastic policy. Levine
(17) reviews these algorithms from a control as inference perspective. Unfortunately, learning MaxEnt
policies with theoretical guarantees remains a challenge in cooperative MARL settings. MASQL (36)
adopts a multi-agent actor-critic architecture similar to MADDPG (19), extending SQL to multi-agent
settings without providing any theoretical guarantees. FOP (44), on the other hand, is a decomposed
actor-critic method (4; 35), which utilizes the decomposed critic instead of the centralized critic to
learn individual policies. It factorizes the optimal joint policy of MaxEnt MARL under the IGO
assumption (see Appendix A.2 for details), which leads to poor performance in complex scenarios. To
overcome the constraint of IGO, MACPF (32) learns optimal joint policy during training phase and
distills independent policies from the optimal joint policy to fulfill decentralized execution. Such a
procedure can be considered as offline imitating learning, where independent policies strive to mimic
the behaviors produced by the optimal joint policy, but they still lack the guarantee of converging
to the optimum. In contrast, our approach is the first MaxEnt actor-critic method with theoretical
guarantee, presenting an improvement to HAML-based algorithms. We augment the objective with
entropy, propose HASPI, prove its monotonic improvement and QRE (20; 6; 11) convergence property
without restrictive assumption, derive HASAC, and establish MEHAML template.

                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

3 PRELIMINARIES

3.1 COOPERATIVE MULTI-AGENT REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

We consider a cooperative Markov game (18) formulated by a tuple N , S, A, r, P, , d. Here,
                                                                                                                          n
N = {1, . . . , n} denotes the set of n agents, S is the finite state space, A =                                          i=1  Ai  is         the  joint

action space, where Ai denotes the finite action space of agent i, r : S Î A  R is the joint reward

function, P : S Î A Î S  [0, 1] is the transition probability function,   [0, 1) is the discount

factor, and d  P(X) (where P(X) denotes the set of probability distributions over a set X ) is

initial state distribution. In this work, we use the notation P(X) to denote the power set of a set

X and Sym(n) to denote the set of permutations of integers {1, . . . , n}, known as the symmetric

group. At time step t  {1, . . . , T }, each agent i  N is at state st  S and then takes independent

actions ait  i(Ài|st), where i is the policy of agent i. Let at = at1, . . . , ant  A denotes the
                            n
joint action and  (À|st) =  i=1  i  Ài|st  denotes the joint policy. We denote the policy space of

agent i as i  ÎsS i Ài|s |s  S , and the joint policy space as   1, . . . , n . The

agents receive a joint reward r (st, at) and move to the next state st+1  P (À|st, at). The initial state
distribution d, the joint policy , and the transition kernel P induce a marginal state distribution at

time t, denoted by t. We define the (unnormalized) marginal state distribution                                                 T              t .  The
                                                                                                                               t=1
standard joint objective of all agents is to maximize the expected total reward, defined as1

                                                               T

                            Jstd() = Es1:T 1:T ,a1:T              r (st, at) .                                                                     (1)

                                                       t=1

3.2 LIMITATIONS OF EXISTING COOPERATIVE MARL METHODS

Existing MAPG methods maximizing the standard joint objective (Equation 1), such as MAPPO and
HAPPO, may fail to find the optimal NE and converge prematurely. We analyze this problem by
considering a singe-state 2-agent cooperative matrix game as shown in Figure 1.

           Agent 1                                    Agent 1                                                                        Agent 1
       ABC                                        ABC                                                                            ABC
A 5 -20 -20                                A 0.36 0.12 0.12                                                               A1 0 0
B -20 10 -20                               B 0.12 0.04 0.04                                                               B0 0 0
C -20 -20 20                               C 0.12 0.04 0.04                                                               C0 0 0
Agent 2
                                                        Agent 2
                                                                                                                 Agent 2

(a) Reward matrix                   (b) Initial joint policy                    (c) Final joint policy 

Figure 1: A single-state 2-agent cooperative matrix game. (a) is the reward matrix of joint actions. (b) represents
the initial joint policy  formed by both agents taking the individual policy  = {0.6, 0.2, 0.2}. (c) represents
the final joint policy  that MAPPO and HAPPO converge to, deterministically choosing action (A, A).

Agents each choose from three possible actions {A, B, C} and receive a joint reward. In this case,
(A, A), (B, B), (C, C) are three different NEs with rewards of 5, 10, 20, with (C, C) being the
optimal NE. To simulate common scenarios where finding the global optima is challenging and, due
to the learning in the early stages, agents are updated towards some reasonably good local optima
initially, we consider a setting where agents assign a higher probability to action (A, A), as shown in
Figure 1b. By exact calculation (see Appendix B), we find traditional algorithms like MAPPO and
HAPPO converge rapidly towards the suboptimal point (A, A), failing to identify the Pareto-optimal
equilibria (C, C), as shown in Figure 1c, which is also corroborated by our experiment (Section 5.1).

The explanation is that maximizing the standard joint objective (Equation 1) leads to convergence
towards the deterministic policies exploiting the local optimum they have explored so far (28).
Specifically, the standard objective discourages any unilateral deviation from the local optimum as it
will result in a decrease in the joint reward. As a result, agents tend to deterministically converge to
the suboptimal NE. To address this issue, we propose to learn stochastic behaviors, which always
preserve the probability of selecting currently underexplored actions, and will eventually converge
to the QRE where action probability is proportional to the exponential of action value. We will
show in the experimental section that our method could successfully converge to the Pareto-optimal
equilibrium (C, C), even when it has a higher probability of choosing action (A, A) initially.

    1We write ai, a, and s when we refer to the action, joint action, and state as to values, and ai, a, and s as to
random variable.

                                              3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

4 METHOD

In this section, we establish maximum entropy heterogeneous-agent reinforcement learning - a
framework for learning stochastic policies in cooperative MARL settings, which alleviates the
suboptimal convergence problem mentioned in Section 3.2. We name it heterogeneous-agent (HA)
as it is a substantial improvement to HARL (45), its Proposition 1 builds upon the prior advantage
decomposition lemma (13), and it is generally applicable to HA settings. This framework encompasses
three key components, including the derivation of MaxEnt MARL objective from a probabilistic
inference perspective in Section 4.1, the HASPI procedure and HASAC algorithm in Section 4.2, and
the unified MEHAML template for theoretically-justified algorithmic design in Section 4.3.

4.1 MAXIMUM ENTROPY MULTI-AGENT REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

To formalize the idea of learning stochastic policies                      O1       O2                   O3

 (À|st), we embed cooperative MARL problem into the                            n        n                    n
PGM (Figure 2). Following Levine (17), we introduce                        a1i      ai2                  a3i

an additional optimality variable Ot, which takes on bi-
nary values indicating the optimality of joint actions taken

by all agents. Specifically, Ot = 1 denotes that time
step t is optimal, and we model it as p(Ot = 1|st, at) 
exp(r(st, at)). Then we use structured variational infer-
ence to approximate the posterior distribution p( |O1:T =

1)     p(s1)  T    p(st+1|st,  at)    exp       T    r(st,  at  )          s1       s2                   s3               ÀÀÀ
              t=1                               t=1

over trajectory  with the distribution q( ) =

q(s1)  T    q(st+1|st,  at)q(at|st),  where  we   fix  the  envi-  Figure 2: The probabilistic graphical model
       t=1
ronment dynamics q(s1) = p(s1) and q(st+1|st, at) = for cooperative MARL.

p(st+1|st, at) to avoid risk-seeking behaviors (17). This

inference procedure leads to the maximum entropy (MaxEnt) objective of MARL (see Appendix C):

                                                  T                        n

                  J () = Es1:T 1:T ,a1:T               r (st, at) +  H i (À|st) ,                                (2)

                                                t=1                        i=1

where  is the temperature constant that trades off between reward and entropy maximization, and
when  = 0, the objective is reduced to standard MARL.

Augmenting standard MARL objective with an entropy term (Equation 2) aligns with the solution
concept of quantal response equilibrium (QRE) proposed by McKelvey & Palfrey (20), which is a
generalization of the standard notion of Nash equilibrium (NE) in game theory. In a QRE, payoffs are
perturbed by additive disturbances (entropy term in our case) so that players do not deterministically
choose the strategy with the highest observed payoff, but rather assign the probability mass in its
strategies according to every strategy's payoff (6). The following Theorem 1 shows that the QRE
policies of MaxEnt objective can be represented as Boltzmann distributions:

Theorem 1 (Representation of QRE). A joint policy QRE   is a QRE if none of the agents can
increase the maximum entropy objective (Equation 2) by unilaterally altering its policy, i.e.,

                          i  N , i  i, J i, Q-RiE  J QRE .

Then the QRE policies are given by

              i  N , Qi RE ai|s :=           exp      E -1                 QQRE     s, ai, a-i
                                                                a-i Q-RiE
                                                                                                ,                (3)

                                           biAi exp  E -1 a-iQ-RiE QQRE (s, bi, a-i)

where the soft Q-functions are defined as follows,

Q(s, a) = r (s, a) + Ea1:,s1:P                                                     n            s0 = s, a0 = a .
                                                                                                                     (4)
                                                 t     r (st, at) +  H i (À|st)

                                             t=1                                 i=1

Proof can be found in Appendix D. Theorem 1 illustrates the connection between QRE policies and

an  energy-based  model,  where  the  term   1  QQRE   (s,  a)  serves     as  the  negative    energy.  When    >  0,
                                             

                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

the QRE policies (Equation 3) are no longer deterministic but rather can represent all the ways of
performing a task. This suggests that the inclusion of entropy term makes the policy QRE stochastic,
enabling more effective exploration of the environment (21), which is consistent with our initial goal
of learning stochastic policies in MARL settings.

4.2 HETEROGENEOUS-AGENT SOFT ACTOR-CRITIC

In this subsection, we develop heterogeneous-agent soft policy iteration (HASPI) to maximize MaxEnt
objective (Equation 2), which alternates between joint soft policy evaluation and heterogeneous-agent
soft policy improvement, and then derive HASAC based on this theory.

4.2.1 HETEROGENEOUS-AGENT SOFT POLICY ITERATION

In joint soft policy evaluation step of HASPI, we compute soft Q-value from any Q(s, a) : SÎA  R
by repeatedly applying a soft Bellman backup operator  given by:

                                   Q(s, a)  r(s, a) + EsP [V (s)] ,                                  (5)

                                                                     n

                       where V (s) = Ea Q(s, a) +  H i Ài|s .                                        (6)

                                                                     i=1

is the soft value function. We can obtain the soft Q-function of any joint policy  as shown in Lemma
4.1. Notably, the same method for updating soft Q-function has been proposed in FOP (44) since it is
the straightforward application of soft Bellman equation.

Lemma 4.1 (Joint Soft Policy Evaluation). Consider the soft Bellman backup operator  and a
mapping Q0 : S Î A  R with |A| < , and define Qk+1 = Qk. Then the sequence Qk will
converge to the joint soft Q-function  as k  .

Proof can be found in E.1. In policy improvement step, we show that the joint policy  can be

updated based on individual policy updates. To this end, we first introduce the following definition.

Definition 1. Let i1:m = {i1, . . . , im}  N be an ordered subset of agents, and let -i1:m refer to
its complement. We write ik when we refer to the kth agent in the ordered subset. Correspondingly,
the multi-agent soft Q-function is defined as

         Qi1:m  s, ai1:m   Ea-i1:m -i1:m          Q s, ai1:m , a-i1:m     +             H i Ài|s . (7)
            

                                                                               i-i1:m

In  the  case   where  m  =  n,  Qi1:n  s, ai1:n    takes the form Q(s, a), representing the joint soft

                                    

Q-function. When m = 0, i.e., i1:m = , the function represents the soft value function V(s).

With this notation defined, we introduce a pivotal proposition that shows the joint soft policy update
can be decomposed into a multiplication of sequential local policy updates.

Proposition 1 (Joint Soft Policy Decomposition). Let  be a joint policy, and i1:n  Sym(n) be an
agent permutation. Suppose that, for each state s and every m = 1, . . . , n,

                                                                           1   i1:m     i1:m-1 im    
nim ew = arg min DKL im                                                        old                    , (8)
                                        Àim |s   exp  E Q s, a , À ai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1
                     im im                      
                                                        Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 [Zold (s, ai1:m-1 )]

where    ai1:m-1  is  drawn  from  the  policy  i1:m-1  (À|s)  and   the  partition  function  Zold  s, ai1:m-1

                                                  new

normalizes the distribution. Then the joint policy satisfies the following:

                             new = arg min DKL                  exp  Q 1   (s, À)    .               (9)
                                                       (À|s) 
                                                                      old

                                                                     Zold (s)

Proof can be found in E.2. Proposition 1 holds significance due to the crucial insight it provides,
suggesting that a MaxEnt MARL problem can be considered as a sum of n MaxEnt RL problems.
It indicates an effective heterogeneous-agent approach to improving the joint soft policy in multi-
agent learning, where each agent optimizes individual KL-divergence sequentially leading to the
optimization of joint soft policy. To formally extend the above process into a policy improvement
procedure with theoretical guarantees of monotonic improvement and convergence to QRE, we
propose the heterogeneous-agent soft policy improvement as formalized below.

                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Lemma 4.2 (Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Improvement). Let i1:n  Sym(n) be an agent
permutation, and for every m = 1, . . . , n, let policy oim ld  im and nim ew be the optimizer of the
minimization problem defined in Equation 8. Then Qnew (s, a)  Qold (s, a) for all (s, a)  S Î A
with |A| <  and J (new)  J (old).

Proof can be found in E.3. Lemma 4.2 guarantees that soft Q-function and MaxEnt objective
monotonically increase at each policy improvement step. Next, we propose heterogeneous-agent soft
policy iteration, which alternates between joint soft policy evaluation and heterogeneous-agent soft
policy improvement, and prove that joint policy  converges to a QRE.

Theorem 2 (Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Iteration). For any joint policy   , if we

repeatedly apply joint soft policy evaluation and heterogeneous-agent soft policy improvement from
                                          n
i  i. Then the joint policy  =            i=1  i  converges        to   QRE        in  Theorem  1.

Proof can be found in E.4. To obtain such theoretical results, the updating approach in Proposition 1
plays a pivotal role. Lemma 4.2 ensures that, through the updates in Proposition 1, soft Q-function
increases monotonically, leading to convergence of the policies. Eventually, none of the agents is
motivated to make an update (Equation 8) at convergence, thereby establishing a QRE.

4.2.2 PRACTICAL ALGORITHM

In practice, large continuous domains require us to derive a practical approximation to the procedure

above. We will use function approximators for both centralized soft Q-function Q (st, at) and

tractable  decentralized  policies  im    aitm |st , for each agent im, parameterized respectively by 

                                      im

and im , and alternate between optimizing both networks with stochastic gradient descent.

The centralized soft Q-function parameters can be trained to minimize the Bellman residual

           JQ() = E(st,at)D         1  Q (st, at) - r (st, at) + Est+1P [V» (st+1)]                            2,
                                    2

where the soft value function is implicitly parameterized through the soft Q-function parameters via

Equation 6. Then we draw a permutation i1:n  Sym(n) and sequentially update the policy of each
agent im according to Equation 8. The policy parameters can be learned by directly minimizing the
expected KL-divergence in Equation 8 disregarding the constant log-partition function

                                                                                                                                        

              im          ait1:m-1 i1ni:e1m w:m--1 1 ,aitm imim    log  im         aitm |st     - Qi1:m        st  ,  ai1:m-1  ,  aitm  .
                                                                          im                            old ;           t
J ( ) = E E im
                 st D

                                                                                                                                  (10)

We refer to the above procedure as HASAC and Appendix F for its full pseudocode.

4.3 MAXIMUM ENTROPY HETEROGENEOUS-AGENT MIRROR LEARNING

In addition to updating policies by directly minimizing the KL-divergence in Equation 8, we aim

to propose a generalized HASPI procedure that provides a range of solutions to MaxEnt MARL

problem. To this end, we start by introducing the necessary definitions of the operators proposed in
HAML (15): the drift functional (HADF) Di ^i|s, » j1:m which, intuitively, is a notion of distance
between i and ^i, given that agents j1:m just updated to »j1:m ; the neighborhood operator Ui i
which forms a region around the policy i; as well as a sampling distribution   P (S) that is
continuous in  (see detailed definitions in Appendix A.3). As shown in (15; 14), these operators

allow for effective abstraction of standard RL and MARL methods due to their generality.

We present the generalized HASPI using these operators. In heterogeneous-agent soft policy improve-
ment step, we redefine the operator that agents optimize as follows,

Definition 2. Let i  N , j1:m  P(-i), and Di be a HADF of agent i. The maximum entropy
heterogeneous-agent mirror operator (MEHAMO) integrates the soft Q-function as

M V (^i)         (s)  Eaj1:m » j1:m ,ai^i      Qj1:m  ,i  (s,    aj1:m  ,  ai)  -      log  ^i  ai|s  -Di ^i|s, » j1:m .
     Di,» j1:m                                    

Then we propose MEHAML Algorithm template 1 to formalize generalized heterogeneous-agent
soft policy iteration. Notably, HAML is a special instance of our template when  = 0.

                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Algorithm 1: Maximum Entropy Heterogeneous-Agent Mirror Learning

Initialise a joint policy 0 = 01, . . . , 0n ;
for k = 0, 1, À À À do

    Compute the soft Q-function Qk (s, a) for all state-(joint)action pairs (s, a);
    Update Qk (s, a) according to the soft Bellman equation (Equation 5);

                                            Joint Soft Policy Evaluation

Draw a permutaion i1:n of agents at random;
for m = 1 : n do

Make       an  update  kim+1  =     arg max      Esk                         ( ) im                 (s) ;
                                 ( im Uimk kim  )                         M V Dim ,ki1+:m 1 -1 k

                                         (Generalized) Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Improvement

    end
end
Output: A limit-point joint policy 

Despite the presence of a drift penalty and a neighborhood constraint, optimizing the MEHAMO
sequentially is sufficient to guarantee the same desired properties as HASPI. We establish the complete
list of the core MEHAML properties in Theorem 3, which confirms that any method derived from
Algorithm 1 has the desired properties of monotonic improvement of the MaxEnt objective and QRE
convergence (detailed proof can be found in Appendix G).

Theorem 3  (The Core Theorem of MEHAML).                                   Let 0    , and the       sequence of joint policies
(k)k=0 be  obtained by a MEHAML algorithm 1                               induced  by Di, U i, i     N , and . Then, the

joint policies induced by the algorithm enjoy the following list of properties (1) Attain the monotonic

improvement property J (k+1)  J (k), (2) Their value functions converge to a quantal response
value function limk Vk = V QRE, (3) Their expected returns converge to a quantal response
return limk J (k) = JQRE, (4) Their -limit set consists of quantal response equilibria.

Proof sketch. We divide the proof into four steps. In Step 1, we show that the sequence of soft value

function (Vk )kN increases monotonically and converges to a limit point. In Step 2, we show the
existence of limit points » of (k)kN, and that they are fixed points of the MEHAML update. In the
most important Step 3, we prove that » is also a fixed point of soft policy iteration by leveraging the

concavity of MEHAMO. Step 4 finalizes the proof, proving that fixed points of soft policy iteration

are QRE policies.

By selecting appropriate HADFs and neighborhood operators that satisfy the definitions, Algo-

rithm 1 has the potential to generate various theoretically-justified algorithms to solve MaxEnt
MARL problem. The drifts Di ^i|s, » j1:m can serve as soft constraints, such as KL-divergence,
controlling the distance between ^i and i when the agents j1:m have just updated to » j1:m . Ad-
ditionally, the neighborhood operators Ui can generate small policy-space subsets, serving as hard

constraints, then the resultant policy improvement will remain within a small range due to the fact
that i  Ui i , i  N , i  i. Therefore, algorithms equipped with appropriate HADFs
and neighborhoods can learn stochastic policies in a stable and coordinated manner. In summary,

MEHAML provides a template for generating theoretically sound, stable, monotonically improving

algorithms that enable agents to learn stochastic policies to solve multi-agent cooperation tasks.

5 EXPERIMENTS

To demonstrate the advantages of the stochastic policies learned by HASAC, we conduct compre-
hensive experiments on the matrix game in Section 3.2 and six benchmarks -- MAMuJoCo (4),
Bi-DexHands (2), SMAC (25), GRF (16), MPE (19), and LAG (23)2. It is important to note that
while HASAC is originally designed for continuous actions, we employ a Gumbel-Softmax (10) to
ensure that HASAC would work for discrete actions. Compared to existing SOTA MAPG methods,
HASAC achieves the best performance in 31 out of 35 tasks across all benchmarks. In addition to
final performance, experimental results (see full experimental details and hyperparameter in Appendix

    2HASAC achieves best performance on fully cooperative MPE and LAG tasks. See Appendix H.2.5 and
H.2.6 for full results.

                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

(a) Matrix Game            (b) Catch Abreast          (c) Two Catch Underarm           (d) Lift Underarm

(e) 3x2-Agent HalfCheetah  (f) 6x1-Agent Walker2d     (g) RPS (2 agents)               (h) Corner (11 agents)

              Figure 3: Performance comparisons on selected tasks of multiple benchmarks.

     Map       Difficulty   HASAC       HAPPO      HATRPO       MAPPO        QMIX         FOP      Timesteps
 8m_vs_9m        Hard      97.5(1.2)   83.8(4.1)   92.5(3.7)   87.5(4.0)   92.2(1.0)   23.4(1.6)      1e7
 5m_vs_6m        Hard      90.0(3.9)   77.5(7.2)   75.0(6.5)   75.0(18.2)  77.3(3.3)   46.9(5.3)      1e7
                 Hard      100.0(0.0)  97.5(1.2)   93.8(1.2)   96.9(0.7)   89.8(2.5)   93.0(0.8)      1e7
     3s5z        Hard      95.0(3.1)   87.5(6.7)   98.8(0.6)   96.9(4.8)   95.3(2.2)   12.5(6.2)      1e7
10m_vs_11m                 97.5(2.4)   88.8(2.0)   97.5(6.4)   93.8(4.7)   87.5(2.5)   37.5(28.1)     2e7
              Super Hard   82.5(4.1)   66.2(3.1)   72.5(14.7)  70.0(10.7)  87.5(12.6)   0.0(0.0)      2e7
   MMM2       Super Hard   90.0(10.8)  92.5(13.9)  88.8(2.7)   97.5(1.2)   82.8(4.4)    0.0(0.0)      2e7
3s5z_vs_3s6z  Super Hard   95.0(3.1)   76.2(3.1)   78.8(0.6)   85.0(2.0)   7.0(27.0)    0.0(0.0)      4e7
              Super Hard
   corridor
  6h_vs_8z

Table 1: Median evaluate winning rate and standard deviation on eight SMAC maps for different methods. All
values within 1 standard deviation of the maximum score rate are marked in bold.

H) show the following advantages of stochastic policies: (1) HASAC exhibits similar performance
across different random seeds and higher training stability , (2) HASAC shows higher learning speed
compared to existing algorithms, and (3) HASAC improves agents' exploration, which facilitates
policies to escape from suboptimal equilibria and converge towards a higher reward equilibrium.

5.1 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Matrix Game. We show the results of HASAC, HAPPO, MAPPO over 200 learning episodes in
matrix game (Figure 1a). HASAC escapes local optima and achieves the Pareto optimum due to the
learned stochastic policies, while the other two methods fall into the suboptimal NE (Figure 3a).

Bi-DexHands. Bi-DexHands offers numerous bimanual manipulation tasks that match various
human skill levels. In the challenging Catch Abreast, Two Catch Underarm, and Lift Underarm tasks
(Figure 3b, 3c, and 3d), all on-policy methods fail within 10m steps due to low sample efficiency.
HATD3 (45), on the other hand, exhibits very high variability and prematurely converges to local
optima. In contrast, HASAC outperforms the other five methods by a large margin. It also exhibits
higher convergence speed and improved robustness, demonstrating the benefits of stochastic policies.

Multi-Agent MuJoCo. We compare our method to HAPPO, MAPPO, and HATD3 in ten MAMu-
JoCo tasks (see Appendix H.2.2). Figure 3e, 3f, and the other results in Appendix H.2.2 demonstrate
that HASAC enjoys superior performance over the three rivals both in terms of reward values and
learning speed. It's worth noting that, although both HATD3 and HASAC are off-policy algorithms,
we generally observe that HASAC learns faster with higher sample efficiency compared to HATD3.
This is because the exploration mechanism of HATD3 involves adding Gaussian noise to a determin-
istic policy, resulting in lower exploration efficiency, requiring more samples to explore the reward
landscape. In contrast, HASAC, due to its inherent encouragement of exploration within stochastic
policies, can effectively explore the entire reward landscape, thus learning better behaviors rapidly.

StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge. We evaluate our method on four hard and four super-hard
maps. As shown in Table 1, HASAC achieves over 90% win rates in 7 out of 8 maps and outperforms
other strong baselines in most maps. Notably, in particularly challenging tasks such as 5m_vs_6m,
3s5z_vs_3s5z, and 6h_vs_8z, we observe that HAPPO and HATRPO would converge towards
suboptimal NE. In addition, FOP is unable to learn meaningful joint policy in super-hard tasks due to
its reliance on the IGO assumption. By contrast, HASAC consistently achieves superior performance

                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

(a) Stochastic vs. deterministic  (b) Effect of different  on Ant 4x2     (c) Effect of different  on matrix game

Figure 4: Performance comparison between HASAC with different hyperparameters on Ant-v2 4x2 task and
matrix game. (a) The comparison indicates that stochastic policy can lead to better equilibrium and stabilize
training. (b) & (c) HASAC converges to different QRE with different temperature parameter .

             Agent 1               Agent 1                       Agent 1                                                                                                          Agent 1
          ABC                   ABC                        ABC                                                                                                                ABC
  A1 0 0                A0 0 0                   A 0.0025 0.0025 0.02                                                                                                 A 0.01 0.01 0.1
  B0 0 0                B0 0 0                   B 0.0025 0.0025 0.02                                                                                                 B 0.01 0.01 0.1
  C0 0 0                C0 0 1                   C 0.02 0.02 0.91                                                                                                     C 0.1 0.1 0.56

(a) HASAC:  = 1       (b) HASAC:  = 5            (c) HASAC:  = 10                                                                                                  (d) HASAC:  = 15
Agent 2
                                               Agent 2
                                                                                               Agent 2
                                                                                                                                                          Agent 2

Figure 5: Different temperature  leads to convergence of different QRE.

and shows the ability to identify higher reward equilibria due to its extensive exploration. We also
observe that HASAC has better stability and higher learning speed across most maps.

Google Research Football. We compare HASAC with QMIX, MAPPO, and HAPPO. As shown
in Figure 3g and 3h, we generally observe that both MAPPO and HAPPO tend to converge to a
non-optimal NE on the two challenging tasks, while HASAC exhibits the ability to attain a higher
reward equilibrium by learning stochastic policies which effectively enhance exploration.

5.2 ABLATION STUDY

We investigate the benefits of stochastic policies learned by HASAC and empirically show how dif-
ferent temperature  values affect the stochasticity of policies, leading to different QRE convergence.
Stochasticity. HASAC learns stochastic policies through maximizing the MaxEnt objective (Equa-
tion 2). We compare it to a deterministic variant which utilizes deterministic policies with fixed
Gaussian exploration noise to maximize standard MARL objective. The results in Figure 4a show
that HASAC achieves a higher reward equilibrium and demonstrates better stability compared to the
deterministic variant, which exhibits high variance across the different runs. These findings highlight
the importance of learning stochastic policies, which can improve robustness, facilitate escape from
suboptimal equilibria, and converge to higher reward equilibrium.
Analysis of temperature . We further show the effect of temperature  on the stochasticity of
policies. As illustrated in Figure 4b (we report -1 in legend), 4c, and 5, when  is large, policies
predominantly emphasize maximizing entropy, leading to poor performance due to the failure to
exploit the reward signal. Conversely, when  is small, MaxEnt objective almost degrades to standard
objective, leading to suboptimal equilibrium due to inadequate exploration. A proper  achieves a
trade-off between exploration and exploitation, eventually resulting in better performance. To obtain
appropriate , we implement both fixed and auto-tuned (see Appendix H.1 for details)  in practice.

6 CONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose maximum entropy heterogeneous-agent reinforcement learning (MEHARL)
-- a unified framework for learning stochastic policies in MARL. This framework comprises three key
components, including the PGM derivation of MaxEnt MARL, the HASAC algorithm with monotonic
improvement and QRE convergence properties, and the unified MEHAML template that provides
any induced MaxEnt method with the same theoretical guarantees as HASAC. To demonstrate the
advantages of stochastic policies, we evaluate HASAC on both discrete and continuous control
tasks, confirming its superior performance and improved robustness and exploration. For future
work, we aim to explore appropriate drift functionals and neighborhood operators to design more
principled MaxEnt MARL algorithms that can further enhance performance and stability in multi-
agent cooperation tasks.

                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Acknowledgements. This work is sponsored by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(62376013) and Beijing Municipal Science & Technology Commission (Z231100007423015).

REFERENCES

 [1] Lawrence M Ausubel and Raymond J Deneckere. A generalized theorem of the maximum.
      Economic Theory, 3(1):99¡107, 1993.

 [2] Yuanpei Chen, Tianhao Wu, Shengjie Wang, Xidong Feng, Jiechuang Jiang, Stephen Marcus
      McAleer, Yiran Geng, Hao Dong, Zongqing Lu, Song-Chun Zhu, and Yaodong Yang. Towards
      human-level bimanual dexterous manipulation with reinforcement learning, 2022.

 [3] Caroline Claus and Craig Boutilier. The dynamics of reinforcement learning in cooperative
      multiagent systems. AAAI/IAAI, 1998(746-752):2, 1998.

 [4] Christian Schroeder de Witt, Bei Peng, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Philip Torr, Wendelin
      B÷hmer, and Shimon Whiteson. Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning for decentralized
      continuous cooperative control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.06709, 19, 2020.

 [5] Jakob Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli, and Shimon Whiteson.
      Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
      intelligence, volume 32, 2018.

 [6] Jacob K Goeree, Charles A Holt, and Thomas R Palfrey. Stochastic game theory for social
      science: A primer on quantal response equilibrium. In Handbook of Experimental Game Theory,
      pp. 8¡47. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2020.

 [7] Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
      deep energy-based policies. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1352¡1361.
      PMLR, 2017.

 [8] Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
      maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor, 2018.

 [9] Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan,
      Vikash Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms
      and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.

[10] Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax.
      arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.

[11] TS Kozitsina, IV Kozitsin, and IS Menshikov. Quantal response equilibrium for the prisoner's
      dilemma game in markov strategies. Scientific reports, 12(1):4482, 2022.

[12] Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Muning Wen, Linghui Meng, Haifeng Zhang, David Mguni, Jun Wang,
      Yaodong Yang, et al. Settling the variance of multi-agent policy gradients. Advances in Neural
      Information Processing Systems, 34:13458¡13470, 2021.

[13] Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Ruiqing Chen, Muning Wen, Ying Wen, Fanglei Sun, Jun Wang, and
      Yaodong Yang. Trust region policy optimisation in multi-agent reinforcement learning, 2022.

[14] Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Christian Schroeder de Witt, and Jakob Foerster. Mirror learning: A
      unifying framework of policy optimisation, 2022.

[15] Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Xidong Feng, Shiyao Ding, Hao Dong, Jun Wang, and Yaodong Yang.
      Heterogeneous-agent mirror learning: A continuum of solutions to cooperative marl. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:2208.01682, 2022.

[16] Karol Kurach, Anton Raichuk, Piotr Stan┤czyk, Michal Zajac, Olivier Bachem, Lasse Espeholt,
      Carlos Riquelme, Damien Vincent, Marcin Michalski, Olivier Bousquet, et al. Google research
      football: A novel reinforcement learning environment. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference
      on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pp. 4501¡4510, 2020.

                                                          10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

[17] Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning and control as probabilistic inference: Tutorial and
      review, 2018.

[18] Michael L Littman. Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In
      Machine learning proceedings 1994, pp. 157¡163. Elsevier, 1994.

[19] Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch.
      Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural
      information processing systems, 30, 2017.

[20] Richard D McKelvey and Thomas R Palfrey. Quantal response equilibria for normal form
      games. Games and economic behavior, 10(1):6¡38, 1995.

[21] Ofir Nachum, Mohammad Norouzi, Kelvin Xu, and Dale Schuurmans. Bridging the gap between
      value and policy based reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
      systems, 30, 2017.

[22] John Nash. Non-cooperative games. Annals of mathematics, pp. 286¡295, 1951.

[23] Xiaoteng Ma QihanLiu, Yuhua Jiang. Light aircraft game: A lightweight, scalable, gym-
      wrapped aircraft competitive environment with baseline reinforcement learning algorithms.
      https://github.com/liuqh16/CloseAirCombat, 2022.

[24] Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob
      Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep
      multi-agent reinforcement learning, 2018.

[25] Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nan-
      tas Nardelli, Tim GJ Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip HS Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon
      Whiteson. The starcraft multi-agent challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04043, 2019.

[26] Kyunghwan Son, Daewoo Kim, Wan Ju Kang, David Earl Hostallero, and Yung Yi. Qtran:
      Learning to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning,
      2019.

[27] Jianyu Su, Stephen Adams, and Peter A. Beling. Value-decomposition multi-agent actor-critics,
      2020.

[28] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The
      MIT Press, second edition, 2018. URL http://incompleteideas.net/book/
      the-book-2nd.html.

[29] Brian Swenson, Ryan Murray, and Soummya Kar. On best-response dynamics in potential
      games. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 56(4):2734¡2767, 2018.

[30] Ming Tan. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative agents. In Proceed-
      ings of the tenth international conference on machine learning, pp. 330¡337, 1993.

[31] J Terry, Benjamin Black, Nathaniel Grammel, Mario Jayakumar, Ananth Hari, Ryan Sullivan,
      Luis S Santos, Clemens Dieffendahl, Caroline Horsch, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, et al. Pettingzoo:
      Gym for multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
      Systems, 34:15032¡15043, 2021.

[32] Jiangxing Wang, Deheng Ye, and Zongqing Lu. More centralized training, still decentralized
      execution: Multi-agent conditional policy factorization, 2023.

[33] Jianhao Wang, Zhizhou Ren, Terry Liu, Yang Yu, and Chongjie Zhang. Qplex: Duplex dueling
      multi-agent q-learning, 2021.

[34] Xihuai Wang, Zheng Tian, Ziyu Wan, Ying Wen, Jun Wang, and Weinan Zhang. Order matters:
      Agent-by-agent policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06205, 2023.

[35] Yihan Wang, Beining Han, Tonghan Wang, Heng Dong, and Chongjie Zhang. {DOP}: Off-
      policy multi-agent decomposed policy gradients. In International Conference on Learning
      Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=6FqKiVAdI3Y.

                                                          11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

[36] Ermo Wei, Drew Wicke, David Freelan, and Sean Luke. Multiagent soft q-learning. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:1804.09817, 2018.

[37] Ying Wen, Yaodong Yang, Rui Luo, and Jun Wang. Modelling bounded rationality in multi-
      agent interactions by generalized recursive reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09216, 2019.

[38] Ying Wen, Yaodong Yang, Rui Luo, Jun Wang, and Wei Pan. Probabilistic recursive reasoning
      for multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09207, 2019.

[39] Zifan Wu, Chao Yu, Deheng Ye, Junge Zhang, Hankz Hankui Zhuo, et al. Coordinated proximal
      policy optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:26437¡26448,
      2021.

[40] Yaodong Yang, Rui Luo, Minne Li, Ming Zhou, Weinan Zhang, and Jun Wang. Mean field
      multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
      5571¡5580. PMLR, 2018.

[41] Yaodong Yang, Jianye Hao, Ben Liao, Kun Shao, Guangyong Chen, Wulong Liu, and Hongyao
      Tang. Qatten: A general framework for cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning, 2020.

[42] Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Jiaxuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu.
      The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games. Advances in Neural
      Information Processing Systems, 35:24611¡24624, 2022.

[43] Haifeng Zhang, Weizhe Chen, Zeren Huang, Minne Li, Yaodong Yang, Weinan Zhang, and Jun
      Wang. Bi-level actor-critic for multi-agent coordination. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
      on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 7325¡7332, 2020.

[44] Tianhao Zhang, Yueheng Li, Chen Wang, Guangming Xie, and Zongqing Lu. Fop: Factorizing
      optimal joint policy of maximum-entropy multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International
      Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12491¡12500. PMLR, 2021.

[45] Yifan Zhong, Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Siyi Hu, Jiaming Ji, and Yaodong Yang. Heterogeneous-
      agent reinforcement learning, 2023.

[46] Brian D Ziebart. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle of maximum causal
      entropy. Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.

                                                          12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Appendix

Table of Contents

A Preliminaries                                        14

A.1 Table of Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

A.2 Individual-Global-Optimal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

A.3 Definitions and Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

A.4 Proofs of Useful Lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

B Exact Calculation of Matrix Game                     18

C Derivation of MaxEnt MARL Objective                  21

D Proofs of Representation of QRE                      22

E Proofs of Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Iteration  24

E.1 Proof of Joint Soft Policy Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

E.2 Proof of Joint Soft Policy Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

E.3 Proof of Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

E.4 Proof of Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

F Pseudocode of HASAC                                  27

G Proofs of The Core Theorem of MEHAML                 28

H Experimental Details                                 34

H.1 Automatically Adjusting Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

H.2 Experimental Setup and Additional Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

H.3 Hyper-parameter Settings for Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

I Ablation Study on Sequential Updates                 42

                                              13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

A PRELIMINARIES

A.1 TABLE OF ACRONYMS
Table 2 lists the main acronyms used in this paper.

                 Table 2: The acronyms used in this paper.

Acronym   Meaning
A2PO      Agent-by-agent Policy Optimization
CoPPO     Coordinated Proximal Policy Optimization
CTDE      Centralized training decentralized execution
FOP       Factorizing Optimal Joint Policy
GRF       Google Research Football
HA        Heterogeneous-Agent
HADF      Heterogeneous-agent drift functional
HAML      Heterogeneous-Agent Mirror Learning
HAPPO     Heterogeneous-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization
HARL      Heterogeneous-Agent Reinforcement Learning
HASAC     Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Actor-Critic
HASPI     Heterogeneous-agent soft policy iteration
HATD3     Heterogeneous-Agent Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
HATRPO    Heterogeneous-Agent Trust Region Policy Optimization
IGO       Individual-Global-Optimal
LAG       Light Aircraft Game
MACPF     Multi-Agent Conditional Policy Factorization
MADDPG    Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
MAMuJoCo  Multi-Agent MuJoCo
MAPG      Multi-agent policy gradient
MAPPO     Multi-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization
MARL      Multi-agent reinforcement learning
MASQL     Multi-Agent Soft Q-Learning
MaxEnt    Maximum entropy
MEHAML    Maximum Entropy Heterogeneous-Agent Mirror Learning
MEHAMO    Maximum Entropy Heterogeneous-Agent Mirror Operator
MEHARL    Maximum Entropy Heterogeneous-Agent Reinforcement Learning
MPE       Multi-Agent Particle Environment
NE        Nash equilibrium
PGM       Probabilistic Graphical Model
PPO       Proximal Policy Optimization
QRE       Quantal response equilibrium
RL        Reinforcement learning
RPS       Run pass and shoot with keeper
SAC       Soft Actor-Critic
SMAC      StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge
SQL       Soft Q-Learning

A.2 INDIVIDUAL-GLOBAL-OPTIMAL

The Individual-Global-Optimal (IGO) assumption is introduced in (44) and can be stated as below.
Definition 3 (IGO). For an optimal joint policy (a|s) : S Î A  [0, 1], if there exist individual
optimal policies [i (ai|s) : S Î Ai  [0, 1]]in=1, such that the following holds:

                                                                                      n

                                             (a|s) = i (ai|s),

                                                                                    i=1

then, we say that [i] satisfy IGO for  under s.

                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

The main limitation of IGO arises from the fact that during training, each agent's policy is updated
based solely on its local Q-function, thereby ignoring the actions of other agents. As discussed by
Wang et al. (32), when multiple agents need to collaborate in decision-making, they may fail to
reach a consensus, updating their policies in the direction that increases their local Q-functions, but
eventually resulting in a decrease in the global Q-function.

A.3 DEFINITIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS

Throughout the proofs, we make the following regularity assumption introduced by Kuba et al. (13):

Assumption 1. There exists   R, such that 0 <   1, and for every agent i  N , the policy
space i is -soft; that means that for every i  i, s  S, and ai  Ai, we have i ai|s  .

In the following, we provide the essential definitions of the two key components, originally proposed
by Kuba et al. (15), that serve as the building blocks of the MEHAML framework. Additionally, we
present the definitions of soft advantage function and a notion of distance that will be utilized in the
proof of Lemma A.2.
Definition 4. Let i  N , a heterogeneous-agent drift functional (HADF) Di of i consists of a map,
which is defined as

                    Di :  Î  Î P(-i) Î S  Di À|s, » j1:m : P Ai  R ,

such that for all arguments, under notation Di ^i|s, » j1:m  Di ^i Ài|s |s, » j1:m ,

             1. Di ^i|s, » j1:m  Di i|s, » j1:m = 0 (non-negativity),
             2. Di ^i|s, » j1:m has all GÔteaux derivatives zero at ^i = i (zero gradient),

We say that the HADF is positive if Di ^i|» j1:m = 0, s  S implies ^i = i, and trivial if
Di ^i|» j1:m = 0, s  S for all , » j1:m , and ^i.

Definition 5. Let i  N . We say that, U i : Îi  P i is a neighborhood operator if i  i,

Ui i contains a closed ball, i.e., there exists a state-wise monotonically non-decreasing metric
 : i Îi  R such that i  i there exists i > 0 such that  i, »i  i = »i  Ui i .

Definition 6. Let i1:m = {i1, . . . , im}  N and j1:k = {j1, . . . , jk}  N be disjoint ordered

subsets  of  agents,  and  let  Qi1:m  s, ai1:m    be the multi-agent soft Q-function. Then the multi-agent

                                   

soft advantage function is defined as

             Ai1:m     s, aj1:k , ai1:m   Qj1:k,i1:m       s, aj1:k , ai1:m  -  Qj1:k  s, aj1:k  .             (11)

                                                                                   

Definition 7. Let X be a finite set and p : X  R, q : X  R be two maps. Then, the notion of
distance between p and q that we adopt is given by p - q  maxxX |p(x) - q(x)|.

A.4 PROOFS OF USEFUL LEMMAS

Lemma A.1 (Multi-Agent Advantage Decomposition). Let  be a joint policy, and i1, . . . , im be an
arbitrary ordered subset of agents. Then, for any state s and joint action ai1:m ,

                                                      m

                                Ai1:m    s, ai1:m  =       Aij s, ai1:j-1 , aij .                              (12)
                                   

                                                      j=1

Proof. (The lemma is proposed in (12) and we quote the proof from Kuba et al. (12)) By the definition
of multi-agent soft advantage function,

Ai1:m        s, ai1:m  =   Qi1:m  s, ai1:m  - V(s)

                              

                           m                                                    m

                       =        Qi1:j    s, ai1:j  - Qi1:j-1  s, ai1:j-1     =         Aij s, ai1:j-1 , aij ,

                                                          

                           j=1                                                  j=1

which finishes the proof.

                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

The continuity of Q is a crucial requirement for proving Theorem 3 later. Now we first prove
that the inclusion of an additional entropy term does not affect the continuity of Q, which is the
state-action value function in the single-agent setting, where  denotes the policy of a single agent.
And finally, we generalize the result to Q in MARL.

Lemma A.2 (Continuity of Q). Let  be a policy. Then Q(s, a) is continuous in .

Proof. Let  and ^ be two policies. Then we have
|Q(s, a) - Q^ (s, a)|

= r(s, a) +  P (s|s, a)     (a|s)Q(s, a) -   (a|s) log  (a|s)

   s                     a                        a

- r(s, a) +  P (s|s, a)     ^(a|s)Q^ (s, a) -  ^ (a|s) log ^ (a|s)

   s                     a                        a

=  P (s|s, a)     [(a|s)Q(s, a) - ^(a|s)Q^ (s, a)]

s              a

- [ (a|s) log  (a|s) - ^ (a|s) log ^ (a|s)]

       a

  P (s|s, a)      |(a|s)Q(s, a) - ^(a|s)Q^ (s, a)|

s              a

+ | (a|s) log  (a|s) - ^ (a|s) log ^ (a|s)|

       a

=  P (s|s, a)     |(a|s)Q(s, a) - ^(a|s)Q(s, a)

s              a

+ ^(a|s)Q(s, a) - ^(a|s)Q^ (s, a)|

+  |( (a|s) - ^ (a|s)) log  (a|s) + ^ (a|s) (log  (a|s) - log ^ (a|s))|

         a

  P (s|s, a)      (|(a|s)Q(s, a) - ^(a|s)Q(s, a)|

s              a

+ |^(a|s)Q(s, a) - ^(a|s)Q^ (s, a)|)

+  (| (a|s) - ^ (a|s)| |log  (a|s)| + |^ (a|s)| |log  (a|s) - log ^ (a|s)|)

         a

=  P (s|s, a)     |(a|s) - ^(a|s)| À |Q(s, a)| + ^(a|s) |Q(s, a) - Q^ (s, a)|

s              a                                     a

+  (| (a|s) - ^ (a|s)| |log  (a|s)| + |^ (a|s)| |log  (a|s) - log ^ (a|s)|)

         a

  P (s|s, a)       - ^ À Qmax + ^(a|s) Q - Q^ 

s              a                      a

+  ( - ^ À logmax  + ^ (a|s)  log  - log ^)

          a

 Qmax À |A| À  - ^ +  Q - Q^  +  logmax  À |A| À  - ^ +  log  - log ^
Hence, we get

Q - Q^   QmaxÀ|A|À-^+ Q - Q^ + logmax À|A|À-^+ log -log ^,

                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

which implies

          Q    -   Q^          À  |A|  À  (Qmax  +   logmax  ) À   -    ^     +   log     -  log ^
                                                              1-

By continuity of  and log , for any arbitrary  > 0, we can find 1 > 0 such that  - ^ < 1

implies    - ^     <                (1-)            and  2   >  0 such  that      - ^  <  2  implies   log   -
                      2À|A|À(Qmax+ logmax )

log ^  <  (1-)  .    Taking       =  min (1, 2)     ,  when   - ^       <     we  get  Q - Q^   <     ,  which
            2

finishes the proof.

Corollary 1. From Lemma A.2 we obtain that the following functions are continuous in  :

             (1) the state value function V(s) = a ((a|s)Q(s, a) - (a|s) log (a|s)),

             (2) the advantage function A(s, a) = Q(s, a) - V(s),

             (3) and the expected total reward J() = Es0 [V(s)].
Corollary 2 (Continuity in MARL). All the results about continuity in  extend to MARL. Policy 
can be replaced with joint policy ; as  is Lipschitz-continuous in agent i 's policy i, the above
continuity results extend to continuity in i. Thus, we will quote them in our proofs for MARL.

                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

B EXACT CALCULATION OF MATRIX GAME

In this section, we provide an exact calculation of the matrix game in Section 3.2. The initial policies
of the matrix game represent the scenario where due to the exploration and learning in the early
stages, agents may have explored a locally optimal solution (in this example action (A, A)) and
assigned a high probability to it. The matrix game aims to show that both MAPPO and HAPPO will
converge towards this local optimum in expectation, while HASAC, owing to its optimization of the
maximum entropy objective, has the potential to escape this local optimum and converge towards a
superior solution.

We start by analyzing MAPPO. For both parameter-sharing and non-parameter-sharing versions of
MAPPO, the policy is optimizing the following objective:

                   niew  =  arg max     Esold ,aold            i(ai|s)                                        (13)
                                                               oild(ai|s) Aold (s, a) , i = 1, 2
                                 i

Note that we omit ratio-clipping in this tabular case, as this is simpler and does not affect the final

result. In this 2-agent single-state matrix game, s  old can be ignored as there is only one state.
Value function Vold (s) can be calculated exactly:

      Vold (s) = Eaold [Qold (s, a)]      Agent 2
                = Eaold [r(s, a)]
                = 0.36 Î 5 + 0.04 Î 10 + 0.04 Î 20 + 4 Î 0.12 Î (-20) + 2 Î 0.04 Î (-20)
                = -8.2

Similarly, the advantage function Aold (s, a) can be calculated exactly as shown in Figure 6.

                                                                     Agent 1
                                                                 ABC
                                                          A 13.2 -11.8 -11.8
                                                          B -11.8 18.2 -11.8
                                                          C -11.8 -11.8 28.2

                  Figure 6: Advantage values Aold (s, a) for all joint actions in the first iteration.

Expanding objective 13, we get

      niew  =  arg max  (0.36  Î  13.2  +  0.12    Î  (-11.8)  Î      2)  Î  i(ai =     A|s)
                                                                                   0.6
                    i

                                                                                              i(ai = B|s)
                         + (0.12 Î (-11.8) + 0.04 Î 18.2 + 0.04 Î (-11.8)) Î

                                                                                                     0.2

                                                                                                 i(ai = C|s)
                         + (0.12 Î (-11.8) + 0.04 Î (-11.8) + 0.04 Î (28.2)) Î

                                                                                                       0.2

            = arg max 3.2 Î i(ai = A|s) + (-5.8) Î i(ai = B|s) + (-3.8) Î i(ai = C|s)

                i

This will encourage i to assign a higher probability to action A and lower probabilities to action

B and C. The updated policies will further encourage choosing action A in subsequent iterations.
Finally, the policies will converge to the deterministic policies i = (1, 0, 0), i = 1, 2.

For HAPPO, the agents update their policies sequentially. Without loss of generality, we assume

they update in the order of Agent 1 and Agent 2. Agent 1 updates its policy according to objective

13 and increases the probability of action A. Let n1ew = (p1, p2, p3), s.t. p1 > 0.6, p2 < 0.2, p3 <
      3
0.2,  j=1   pj  =  1.  Agent  2  updates  its      policy  according  to  the  following  objective:

                                                           18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

n2ew  =  arg max  Esold ,aold   2(a2|s)     n1ew(a1|s)  Aold  (s,  a)
                                o2ld(a2|s)  o1ld(a1|s)
              2

      = arg max (0.6 Î p1 Î 13.2 + 0.6 Î p2 Î (-11.8) + 0.6 Î p3 Î (-11.8)) Î      2(a2 = A|s)

                2                                                                    0.6

                  + (0.2 Î p1 Î (-11.8) + 0.2 Î p2 Î 18.2 + 0.2 Î p3 Î (-11.8)) Î  2(a2 = B|s)

                                                                                     0.2

                  + (0.2 Î p1 Î (-11.8) + 0.2 Î p2 Î (-11.8) + 0.2 Î p3 Î (28.2)) Î  2(a2 = C|s)

                                                                                          0.2

      = arg max (13.2 Î p1 - 11.8 Î p2 - 11.8 Î p3) Î 2(a2 = A|s)

                2

                  (-11.8 Î p1 + 18.2 Î p2 - 11.8 Î p3) Î 2(a2 = B|s)

                  (-11.8 Î p1 - 11.8 Î p2 + 28.2 Î p3) Î 2(a2 = C|s)

Since (13.2 Î p1 - 11.8 Î p2 - 11.8 Î p3) > 3.2, (-11.8 Î p1 + 18.2 Î p2 - 11.8 Î p3) <
-5.8, (-11.8 Î p1 - 11.8 Î p2 + 28.2 Î p3) < -3.8, this will encourage assigning higher probability
to action A and lower probability to action B and C. Similar to MAPPO, the updated policies
will further encourage choosing action A in subsequent iterations. Finally, the policies converge to
i = (1, 0, 0), i = 1, 2.

By contrast, HASAC is possible to escape the local optimum and converge to better stochastic
policies, as we show below. Without loss of generality, we assume the update order is Agent 1 and
Agent 2. We first consider the update of Agent 1, who optimizes the following objective:

         n1ew       =  arg max  Ea1  1 ,a2 o2ld  Qold (s, a1, a2) -  log 1(a1|s)

                            1

                    =  arg max  Ea1  1 ,a2 o2ld  r(s, a1, a2) -  log 1(a1|s)

                            1

Parametrizing 1 = (p1, p2, p3), we get

         n1ew = arg max - 5p1 - 14p2 - 12p3 - p1 log p1 - p2 log p2 - p3 log p3,

                           1

                             s.t. p1 + p2 + p3 = 1

The solutions corresponding to different  are listed in the left part of Table 3.

                       After the first update           Convergent (both)

                       p1       p2          p3          p1             p2  p3

                  1 0.9990 0.0001 0.0009 1.0000 0.0000 0.0000

                  2 0.9603 0.0107 0.0290 1.0000 0.0000 0.0000

                  5 0.7083 0.1171 0.1747 0.9849 0.0075 0.0076

                  10 0.5254 0.2136 0.2609 0.0221 0.0224 0.9555

                  15 0.4596 0.2522 0.2882 0.1278 0.1354 0.7368

                  20 0.4269 0.2722 0.3009 0.2514 0.2790 0.4697

Table 3: Exact calculation results for HASAC update. On the left we show the policy after the first update; on
the right we show the policies of 1 and 2 after convergence.

As  increases, the policy is encouraged to be stochastic, trading off between stochasticity and reward
maximization. With appropriate , the policies will be able to assign higher probabilities to action B

                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
and C, thereby retaining the exploration of them. It then encourages more exploration of action B
and C in subsequent updates. Finally, the convergent policies predominantly choose action C while
still being stochastic, as shown in the right part of Table 3.
Thus, we show the benefit of stochastic policies and that in expectation, with appropriate , HASAC
is capable of escaping local optimum and converging to better stochastic policies. We note that
the exact calculation results are generally consistent with the empirical results in Section 5.2 (this
can be easily checked by computing the joint action probabilities and comparing with Table 5). An
observation is that when  = 5, theoretically it is not sufficient for escaping local optimum but
empirically it already results in learning the optimal actions (C, C). This may be due to the fact that
in practical implementation, HASAC learns a centralized Q-function by sampling from the replay
buffer, which introduces some randomness that causes slight deviations between the experimental
results and the exact calculated ones.

                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

C DERIVATION OF MAXENT MARL OBJECTIVE

In this section, we derive the maximum entropy objective of MARL (Equation 2) by performing
variational inference in Figure 2. In structured variational inference, our objective is to approximate
some distribution p(y) with another, usually simpler distribution q(y). In our case, we aim to
approximate p( ), given by

                             T                                           T

                         p( ) = p(s1) p(st+1|st, at) exp                          r(st, at) ,             (14)

                             t=1                                         t=1

via the distribution

                      T                                       T                          n

q( ) = q(s1) q(st+1|st, at)q(at|st) = q(s1) q(st+1|st, at) qim atim |st ,                                 (15)

                      t=1                                     t=1                        m=1

where the joint policy q(at|st) follows a fully independent factorization q(at|st) =
n
m=1  qim  aitm |st    as we assume that agents are independent of each other under CTDE paradigm.

To avoid risk-seeking behavior, we fix the environment dynamics, i.e., q(s1) = p(s1) and

q(st+1|st, at) = p(st+1|st, at). In structured variational inference, approximate inference is per-

formed by optimizing the variational lower bound (also called the evidence lower bound). In our case,

the evidence is that Ot = 1, t  {1, . . . , T } and the posterior is conditioned on the initial state s1.

The variational lower bound is given by

     log p(O1:T ) = log      p(O1:T , s1:T , a1:T )ds1:T da1:T

                      = log  p(O1:T      ,  s1:T  ,  a1:T  )  q(s1:T  ,  a1:T  )  ds1:T  da1:T
                                                              q(s1:T  ,  a1:T  )

                      = log E(s1:T ,a1:T )q(s1:T ,a1:T )      p(O1:T , s1:T , a1:T )
                                                                 q(s1:T , a1:T )

                       E(s1:T ,a1:T )q(s1:T ,a1:T ) [log p(O1:T , s1:T , a1:T ) - log q(s1:T , a1:T )] ,

where the inequality on the last line is obtained via Jensen's inequality. Substituting the definitions of
p( ) and q( ) from Equations 14 and 15, and according to q(st+1|st, at) = p(st+1|st, at), the bound
reduces to

                                                     T                            n

log p (O1:T )  E(s1:T ,a1:T )q(s1:T ,a1:T )                   r (st, at) -           log qim atim |st  ,  (16)

                                                     t=1                       m=1

Optimizing this lower bound with respect to the policy q(at|st) corresponds exactly to the following
maximum entropy objective:

                                            T                                  n

          J () = Es1:T 1:T ,a1:T                        r (st, at) +  H i (À|st) ,                        (2)

                                            t=1                          i=1

where we multiply a temperature parameter  to the entropy term to assign relative importance to
entropy and reward maximization (9).

                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

D PROOFS OF REPRESENTATION OF QRE

Theorem 1 (Representation of QRE). A joint policy QRE   is a QRE if none of the agents can
increase the maximum entropy objective (Equation 2) by unilaterally altering its policy, i.e.,

                                    i  N , i  i, J i, Q-RiE  J QRE .

Then the QRE policies are given by

                   i  N , Qi RE ai|s :=           exp   E -1                                    QQRE  s, ai, a-i
                                                                  a-i Q-RiE
                                                                                                                           ,      (3)

                                                  biAi exp  E -1 a-iQ-RiE QQRE (s, bi, a-i)

where the soft Q-functions are defined as follows,

Q(s, a) = r (s, a) + Ea1:,s1:P                                                                               n          s0 = s, a0 = a .
                                                                                                                                             (4)
                                                      t                          r (st, at) +  H i (À|st)

                                                  t=1                                                      i=1

Proof. First, we consider the following constrained policy optimization problem to agent i: for a
given state s  S,

                                                                                     n

                   max Eaii,a-i-i [Q(s, a)] -                                                   j aj|s log j aj|s ,
                   i
                                                                                     j=1 aj Aj

                                         s.t.          i ai|s = 1.

                                                ai Ai

We consider its associated Lagrangian function as follows,

                                                                              n         j aj|s log j aj|s + (                     i ai|s - 1)

L(i, ) = Eaii,a-i-i [Q(s, a)] - 

                                                  j=1 aj Aj                                                                ai Ai

                      n                                n

       =                  j aj|s Q(s, a) -                                              j aj|s log j aj|s + (                     i ai|s - 1).

          aA j=1                                       j=1 aj Aj                                                           ai Ai

Then we consider the derivative of L(i, ) with respect to i, we obtain

       L(i, )                              j aj|s Q(s, ai, a-i) -  log i ai|s -  + .
       i (ai|s) =
                              a-iA-i j= i

Let     L( i ,)    =  0,  we  know  the  optimal  policy                         i  satisfies  the  following  condition,
        i (ai |s)

                      i ai|s = exp(-1Ea-i-i Q s, ai, a-i                                                     
                                                                                                      ) exp( - 1).

                                                                                                             

Furthermore, since aiAi i ai|s = 1, we know optimal lagrange multiplier  satisfies

                          exp(1 -  ) =            exp(-1Ea-i-i Q s, ai, a-i ),
                                     
                                         ai Ai

i.e.,

                       = 1 - log                exp(-1Ea-i-i Q s, ai, a-i ) .

                                         ai Ai

Finally, we obtain the optimal policy as follows,

                          i ai|s =        exp(-1Ea-i-i Q                                         s, ai, a-i    )     .
                                         biAi exp(-1Ea-i-i                                      [Q (s, bi,   a-i)])

                                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Hence, when each agent can not increase the maximum entropy objective by unilaterally changing its
policy, policies take the following form,

                                                                      n

i  N , Qi RE  ai|s  =  arg max     Eai  i ,a-i Q-RiE  QQRE (s, a)  -             j  aj |s  log j  aj |s

                          i (À|s)                                     j=1 aj Aj

                    = i ai|s =     exp(-1Ea-iQ-RiE QQRE s, ai, a-i )                ,

                                   biAi exp(-1Ea-iQ-RiE QQRE (s, bi, a-i) )

which finishes the proof.

                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

E PROOFS OF HETEROGENEOUS-AGENT SOFT POLICY ITERATION

In this section, we introduce heterogeneous-agent soft policy iteration and prove its properties of
monotonic improvement and convergence to the QRE policies.

E.1 PROOF OF JOINT SOFT POLICY EVALUATION

For joint soft policy evaluation, we will repeatedly apply soft Bellman operator  to Q(s, a) until

convergence, where:

                                       Q(s, a)  r(s, a) + EsP [V (s)]                                                                   (17)

                                                                          n

                            V (s) = Ea Q(s, a) +  H i Ài|s .                                                                            (18)

                                                                          i=1

In this way, as shown in lemma 4.1, we can get Q for any joint policy .

Lemma 4.1 (Joint Soft Policy Evaluation). Consider the soft Bellman backup operator  and a
mapping Q0 : S Î A  R with |A| < , and define Qk+1 = Qk. Then the sequence Qk will
converge to the joint soft Q-function  as k  .

Proof. We define the reward with entropy term as r(s, a)  r(s, a)+EsP                                            n        H      i  Ài|s        .
We can then express the update rule as:                                                                          i=1

                               Q(s, a)  r(s, a) + EsP,a [Q(s, a)]

and apply the standard convergence results for policy evaluation (28).

E.2 PROOF OF JOINT SOFT POLICY DECOMPOSITION

After we get Q(s, a), we draw a permutation i1:n  Sym(n) and update each agent's policy im
according to the following optimization proposition:

Proposition 1 (Joint Soft Policy Decomposition). Let  be a joint policy, and i1:n  Sym(n) be an
agent permutation. Suppose that, for each state s and every m = 1, . . . , n,

                                                                                             1  i1:m         i1:m-1 im                  
nim ew = arg min DKL im                                                                         old                                      , (8)
                                              Àim |s   exp     E Q s, a , À ai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1
                     im im                            
                                                                   Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 [Zold (s, ai1:m-1 )]

where   ai1:m-1  is  drawn  from         the  policy  i1:m-1       (À|s)  and     the   partition    function       Zold            s, ai1:m-1

                                                        new

normalizes the distribution. Then the joint policy satisfies the following:

                            new = arg min DKL                            exp      Q 1        (s, À)    .                                  (9)
                                                                (À|s) 
                                                                                   old

                                                                               Zold (s)

Proof.  First,  we   use  Lim       (im  (À|s))  to   denote

                            oilm d

                                                                               1     i1:m         i1:m-1 im               
        DKL im                                                                       old                                  .
                            Àim |s        exp    E Q s, a , À ai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1
                                         
                                                                                                i1:m-1
                                                      E [Z (s, a )] ai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1
                                                                                     old

Suppose that there exists a policy » = new, such that Lold (» (À|s)) < Lold (new(À|s)), we have

                                    n                                                                  n

Ea» [Qold (s, a)] +  H »i Ài|s > Eanew [Qold (s, a)] +  H niew Ài|s . (19)

                                    i=1                                                              i=1

From  Equation   8,  we   have      Lim       (nim ew(À|s))    Lim       (»im  (À|s))   for  every   m    =  1,  .  .  .  ,  n,  i.e.,

                                      oilm d                     oilm d

        Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 ,aim niemw                 Qi1:m   (s,  ai1:m-1  ,  aim   )  -    log  nim ew  aim |s

                                                         old

         Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 ,aim »im                  Qi1:m        (s,   ai1:m-1  ,  aim  )  -    log  »im   aim |s              .

                                                         old

                                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                                                              Q (s, a ) i1:m-1

                                                                                 old
Subtracting both sides of the inequality by Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1                                   i1:m-1  gives

Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 ,aim niemw        Aim          (s,  ai1:m-1  ,  aim  )  -       log   nim ew  aim |s

                                        old                                                                        (20)

 Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 ,aim »im                  Aim      (s,  ai1:m-1  ,  aim   )  -      log   »im   aim |s  .

                                                 old

Combining this with Lemma A.1 gives

Eanew                                   n

        n  Aold (s, a) +  H niew Ài|s

=                                      i=1

     m=1                                          im            i1:m-1 im                           im   aim |s
                                                  old                                               new
           E A (s, a , a ) -  log  ai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 ,aim niemw

by Inequality 20

       n   Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 ,aim »im            Aim      (s,  ai1:m-1    ,  aim  )  -    log   »im     aim |s

                                                     old

    m=1

                                               n

= Ea» Aold (s, a) +  H »i Ài|s .

                                              i=1

The resulting inequality can be equivalently rewritten as

                                           n                                                          n

Ea» [Qold (s, a)] +  H »i Ài|s                     Eanew [Qold (s, a)] +  H niew Ài|s , (21)

                                         i=1                                                        i=1

which contradicts Equation 19. Hence, for all   , Lold (new(À|s))  Lold ((À|s)), i.e.,

           new = arg min DKL                                exp         Q 1           (s, À)     ,
                                                   (À|s) 
                                                                         old

                                                                        Zold (s)

which finishes the proof.

E.3 PROOF OF HETEROGENEOUS-AGENT SOFT POLICY IMPROVEMENT

Then the soft Q-function and joint maximum entropy objective (Equation 2) has monotonic improve-
ment property as formalized below.

Lemma 4.2 (Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Improvement). Let i1:n  Sym(n) be an agent
permutation, and for every m = 1, . . . , n, let policy oim ld  im and nim ew be the optimizer of the
minimization problem defined in Equation 8. Then Qnew (s, a)  Qold (s, a) for all (s, a)  S Î A
with |A| <  and J (new)  J (old).

Proof. From Proposition 1, we have

new = arg min DKL                    exp               Q 1      (s, À)        =    arg   min     Lold    ((À|s)).
                            (À|s) 
                                                        old                              

                                                  Zold (s)

It must be the case that Lold (new(À|s))  Lold (old(À|s)). Hence

                                               n                                                     n             = Vold (s).
                                                                                                                    (22)
Eanew [Qold (s, a)] +  H niew Ài|s                 Eaold [Qold (s, a)] +  H oild Ài|s

                                             i=1                                                   i=1

                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Last, considering the soft Bellman equation, the following holds:                                              ) (by Inequality 22)
Qold (s, a) = r(s, a) + EsP [Vold (s)]

                                                                                                            n

               r(s, a) + EsP Eanew [Qold (s, a)] +  H niew Ài|s

                                                                                                          i=1

             ...

               Qnew (s, a),
                                                                                                                   (23)

where we have repeatedly expanded Qold on the RHS by applying the soft Bellman equation and the
bound in Inequality 22. Convergence to Qnew follows from Lemma 4.1.

We use it to prove the claim as follows,              n

Vnew (s) = Eanew [Qnew (s, a)] +  H niew Ài|s

                                                  i=1

                                                                          n

                       Eanew [Qold (s, a)] +  H niew Ài|s (by Inequality 23)

                                                  i=1

                                                                         n

                       Eaold [Qold (s, a)] +  H oild Ài|s (by Inequality 22)

                                                  i=1

                      = Vold (s).

Subsequently, the monotonic improvement property of the joint maximum entropy return follows
naturally, as

                      J (new ) = Esd [Vnew (s)]  Esd [Vold (s)] = J (old ) .

E.4 PROOF OF HETEROGENEOUS-AGENT SOFT POLICY ITERATION

The full heterogeneous-agent soft policy iteration algorithm alternates between the joint soft policy

evaluation and the heterogeneous-agent soft policy improvement steps, and it will provably converge

to the QRE policies.

Theorem 2 (Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Policy Iteration). For any joint policy   , if we

repeatedly apply joint soft policy evaluation and heterogeneous-agent soft policy improvement from
                                   n
i  i. Then the joint policy  =     i=1    i  converges   to  QRE  in  Theorem  1.

Proof. Let k be the joint policy at iteration k.

First, by Lemma 4.2, we have that Qk (s, a)  Qk+1 (s, a), and that the soft Q-function is upper-
bounded by Qmax for all    (both reward and entropy are bounded). Hence, the sequence

converges to some limit point » .

Then, considering this limit point joint policy » , it must be the case that

                      i  N , i  i, Li»i (»i(À|s))  Li»i (i(À|s)).

And we have  »i Ài|s = arg max Eaii Qi» s, ai -  log i ai|s

                                 i (Ài |s)P (Ai )

                      = arg max Eaii,a-i» -i [Q» (s, a)]                                                       (24)

                          i (Ài |s)P (Ai )

                               n          j aj|s log j aj|s , i  N .

                      -

                      j=1 aj Aj

Last, following the proof of Theorem 1, we have

             »i ai|s :=             exp   -1Ea-i» -i Q»       s, ai, a-i      a-i)]) .
                                          exp (-1Ea-i» -i    [Q» (s, bi,
                                   bi Ai

Thus, » is a quantal response equilibrium, which finishes the proof.

                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

F PSEUDOCODE OF HASAC

Algorithm 2: Heterogeneous-Agent Soft Actor-Critic

Input: temperature , Polyak coefficient  , batch size B, number of: agents n, episodes K,

         steps per episode T , mini-epochs e;
Initialize: the critic networks: 1 and 2 and policy networks: i iN , replay buffer B, Set
 target parameters equal to main parameters targ, 1  1, targ, 2  2;
for k = 0, 1, . . . , K - 1 do

    Observe state oti and select action ait  i (À|oti);
    Execute ait in the environment;
    Observe next state ot+1, reward rt;
    Push transitions oti, ait, oti+1, rt , i  N , t  T into B;
    Sample a random minibatch of B transitions from B;

    Compute the critic targets

                                                     n

yt = r+    min    Qtarg  ,i  (st+1,  at+1)   -           log i ait+1|oit+1  , at+1   (À|st+1) ;

           i=1,2                                    i=1

Update Q-functions by one step of gradient descent using

                i  =  arg       min  1       (yt - Qi (st, at))2   for i = 1, 2;

                                 i   B  t

Draw a permutation of agents i1:n at random;

for agent im = i1, . . . , in do
    Update agent im by solving

nim ew  =  arg  max   1         min     Qi      s , ai1:m-1t       o , a o , a i1:m-1imimim+1:n      oim+1:n
                      B                                                                 oilm d +1:n
                 ^im            i=1,2                                t                                 t
                                                        nie1w:m-1           ^im t

                             t

                                -       log  im      aim    |oitm

                                               ^im     ^im

         where ai(oti) is a sample from i (À|oit) which is differentiable wrt  via the
         reparametrization trick;
         with e mini-epochs of policy gradient ascent;
    end
    Update the target critic network smoothly

                                 targ ,i  targ ,i + (1 - )i for i = 1, 2;

end
Discard  . Deploy i iN in execution;

                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

G PROOFS OF THE CORE THEOREM OF MEHAML

First, we show that enhancing the MEHAMO (Definition 2) alone is sufficient to guarantee policy
improvement, as demonstrated by the following lemma.

Lemma G.1. Let old and new be joint policies and let i1:n  Sym(n) be an agent permutation.
Suppose that, for every state s  S and every m = 1, . . . , n,

                    M V (niemw )            old       (s)       M V (oilm d )             old  (s)                     (25)
                         Dim ,nie1w:m-1                              Dim ,nie1w:m-1

Then, new is jointly better than old , so that for every state s,

                                                     Vnew (s)  Vold (s).
Subsequently, the monotonic improvement property of the joint return follows naturally, as

                    J (new ) = Esd [Vnew (s)]  Esd [Vold (s)] = J (old ) .

Proof. By Inequality 25, we have

Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 ,aim niemw               Qi1:m     (s,  ai1:m-1  ,  aim  )     -    log   nim ew  aim |s

                                               old

-  Dim              nim ew  |s,  i1:m-1

      old                          new

 Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 ,aim oilm d                  Qi1:m     (s,  ai1:m-1  ,  aim   )  -       log  oim ld  aim |s

                                                    old

-  Dim              oim ld  |s,  i1:m-1  .

      old                          new

                                                                               Q (s, a ) i1:m-1

                                                                                  old
Subtracting both sides of the inequality by Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1                                       i1:m-1    gives

Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 ,aim niemw               Aim       (s,  ai1:m-1  ,  aim  )  -       log   nim ew  aim |s

                                               old

-  Dim              nim ew  |s,  i1:m-1

      old                          new

 Eai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 ,aim oilm d                  Aim       (s,  ai1:m-1  ,  aim   )  -      log   oim ld  aim |s       (26)

                                                    old

-  Dim              oim ld  |s,  i1:m-1  .

      old                          new

Let Dold (new |s)   D n          im      nim ew  |s,  i1:m-1        . Combining this with Lemma A.1 gives
                    m=1 old
                                                        new

Eanew                                   n                           - Dold (new |s)

        n  Aold (s, a) +  H niew Ài|s

=                                      i=1

     m=1                                              im            i1:m-1 im                             im   aim |s
                                                      old                                                 new
           E A (s, a , a ) -  log  ai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 ,aim niemw

-Dimold    nim ew   |s,     i1:m-1

                              new

by Inequality 20

n

 E m=1     ai1:m-1 nie1w:m-1 ,aim oilm d              Aim      (s,  ai1:m-1    ,  aim  )  -    log   oim ld    aim |s

                                                         old

-Dimold    oim ld   |s,  i1:m-1

                           new

= Eaold                                          n                     - Dold (old |s) .

                    Aold (s, a) +  H oild Ài|s

                                                i=1

                                                           28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

The resulting inequality can be equivalently rewritten as

                                                   n                                            (27)

    Eanew [Qold (s, a)] +  H niew Ài|s - Dold (new |s)

                                                 i=1
                                                        n

     Eaold [Qold (s, a)] +  H oild Ài|s - Dold (old |s) , s  S.

                                                      i=1

We use it to prove the claim as follows,

                                                                     n  - Dold (new |s)

Vnew (s) = Eanew [Qnew (s, a)] +  H niew Ài|s

                                                                   i=1
                                                                    n

           = Eanew [Qold (s, a)] +  H niew Ài|s

                                                                  i=1

+ Dold (new |s) + Eanew [Qnew (s, a) - Qold (s, a)] ,
by Inequality 27

                                                   n                    - Dold (old |s)

 Eaold [Qold (s, a)] +  H oild Ài|s

                                                 i=1

+ Dold (new |s) + Eanew [Qnew (s, a) - Qold (s, a)] ,

= Vold (s) + Dold (new |s) + Eanew [Qnew (s, a) - Qold (s, a)]

= Vold (s) + Dold (new |s) + Eanew ,sP [r(s, a) + Vnew (s) - r(s, a) - Vold (s)]

= Vold (s) + Dold (new |s) + Eanew ,sP [Vnew (s) - Vold (s)]

    Vold  (s)  +    inf     [Vnew  (s) - Vold     (s)] .

                     s

Hence     Vnew (s) - Vold (s)              inf   [Vnew  (s) - Vold      (s)] .

                                              s

Taking infimum over s and simplifying

(1  -  )  inf  [Vnew  (s)   -  Vold  (s)]      0

           s

Therefore, infs [Vnew (s) - Vold (s)]  0, which proves the lemma.

Then, any algorithm derived from Algorithm 1 ensures that the resulting policies satisfy Condition
25, as demonstrated by the following lemma.

Lemma G.2. Suppose an agent im maximizes the expected MEHAMO

          nim ew  =       arg max          Esold          M V (s) . (im )                       (28)
                      ( im Uimold oilm d  )
                                                               Dim ,nie1w:m-1
                                                                                old

Then, for every state s  S

                  M V (niemw )            old  (s)      M V (oilm d )      old           (s).   (29)

                       Dim ,nie1w:m-1                        Dim ,nie1w:m-1

Hence, new attains the properties provided by Lemma G.1.

Proof. We will prove this statement by contradiction. Suppose that there exists s0  S such that

               M V (niemw )          old       (s0) <   M V (oilm d )      old           (s0).

                    Dim ,nie1w:m-1                           Dim ,nie1w:m-1

Let us define the following policy ^im .

                            ^im Àim |s =          oim ld Àim |s , at s = s0
                                                  nim ew Àim |s , at s = s0

                                                  29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Note that ^im is (weakly) closer to oim ld than nim ew at s0, and at the same distance at other states.
                                oim ld                                            oim ld . Further,
Together with nim ew     U im           ,  this  implies  that  ^im    U im

                           old                                           old

Esold                 M V (s) - E (^im )   old                  sold   M V (niemw )        old       (s)

                           Dim ,nie1w:m-1                                   Dim ,nie1w:m-1

                               ( ) ^im                                 ( ) niemw           (s0)
= old (s0)                  M V Dim ,nie1w:m-1            (s ) - M V 0                               > 0.
                                                 old                   Dim ,nie1w:m-1 old

The above contradicts nim ew as being the argmax of Equality 28, as ^im is strictly better. The
contradiction finishes the proof.

Next, we prove the most fundamental theorem of MEHAML.

Theorem 3 (The Core Theorem of MEHAML). Let 0  , and the sequence of joint policies
(k)k=0 be obtained by a MEHAML algorithm 1 induced by Di, U i, i  N , and . Then, the
joint policies induced by the algorithm enjoy the following list of properties (1) Attain the monotonic
improvement property J (k+1)  J (k), (2) Their value functions converge to a quantal response
value function limk Vk = V QRE, (3) Their expected returns converge to a quantal response
return limk J (k) = JQRE, (4) Their -limit set consists of quantal response equilibria.

Proof. Proof of Property 1.
It follows from combining Lemma G.1 & G.2.

Proof of Properties 2, 3 & 4.

Step 1: convergence of the value function. By Lemma G.1, we have that Vk (s)  Vk+1 (s), s 
S, and that the value function is upper-bounded by Vmax. Hence, the sequence of value functions
(Vk )kN converges. We denote its limit by V .

Step 2: characterisation of limit points. As the joint policy space  is bounded, by Bolzano-
Weierstrass theorem, we know that the sequence (k)kN has a convergent subsequence. Therefore,it
has at least one limit point policy. Let » be such a limit point. We introduce an auxiliary notation: for
a joint policy  and a permutation i1:n, let HU (, i1:n) be a joint policy obtained by a MEHAML
update from  along the permutation i1:n.

Claim: For any permutation z1:n  Sym(n),

                                                 » = HU (» , z1:n)

Proof of Claim. Let ^ = HU (» , z1:n) = » and (kr )rN be a subsequence converging to » . Let

us recall that the limit value function is unique and denoted as V . Writing Ei01:: n [À] for the expectation
operator under the stochastic process i1k:n kN of update orders, for a state s  S, we have

                      0  =  lim  Ei10:: n  Vkr+1 (s) - Vkr (s)

                            r

                      as every choice of permutation improves the value function

                       lim P        ik1:rn = z1:n     VHU(kr ,z1:n)(s) - Vkr (s)

                          r

                      =  p  (z1:n)  lim    VHU(kr ,z1:n)(s) - Vkr (s)             .

                                    r

By the continuity of the expected MEHAMO (following from the continuity of the state-action

value function (Lemma A.2), the entropy term, HADFs, neighbourhood operators, and the sampling
distribution) we obtain that the first component of HU (kr , z1:n), which is kz1r+1, is continuous in
kr by Berge's Maximum Theorem (1). Applying this argument recursively for z2, . . . , zn, we have
that HU (kr , z1:n) is continuous in kr .Hence, as kr converges to », its HU converges to the HU
of », which is ^ . Hence, we continue writing the above derivation as

                              = p (z1:n) [V^ (s) - V» (s)]  0, by Lemma G.1.
As s was arbitrary, the state-value function of ^ is the same as that of  : V^ = V» , by the Bellman
equation 5: Q(s, a) = r(s, a) + E [V (s)], this also implies that their state-action value functions

                                                          30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

are the same: Q^ = Q» . Let m be the smallest integer such that ^zm = »zm . This means that ^zm
achieves a greater expected MEHAMO than »zm . Hence,

         Es»             M V (^zm )            (s)    > Es»             M V (»zm )             (s)

                              Dzm ,» z1:m-1 »                                Dzm ,» z1:m-1 »

then for some state s,

                         M V (^zm )            (s) >          M V (»zm )            (s)

                              Dzm ,» z1:m-1 »                      Dzm ,» z1:m-1 »

which can be written as

Eaz1:m-1 » z1:m-1 ,azm ^zm    Qz1:m  (s,  az1:m-1  ,  azm  )  -    log  ^zm  (azm  |s)  - Dz»m (^zm |s, » z1:m-1 )

                                 »

= Eaz1:m-1 » z1:m-1 ,azm ^zm     Qz1:m    (s,  a , z1:m-1  azm )  -     log  ^zm  (azm |s)  - Dz»m (^zm |s, » z1:m-1 )

                                    ^

> Eaz1:m-1 » z1:m-1 ,azm »zm     Qz1:m    (s,  a , z1:m-1  azm )  -     log  »zm  (azm |s)  - Dz»m (»zm |s, » z1:m-1 )

                                    »

= Eaz1:m-1 » z1:m-1 ,azm »zm     Qz1:m    (s,  a , z1:m-1  azm )  -     log  »zm  (azm |s)  .

                                    »

Adding both sides of the inequality by             m-1     H  (»zi   (À|s))  and  using  the   equation  V (s)  =
                                                   i=1
                         n       i (À|s)
Ea Q(s, a) +             i=1  H                gives

                                                                 n

         V^ (s) = Ea^ Q^ (s, a) +  H ^i (À|s)

                                                               i=1
                                                       n

          Ea^ Q^ (s, a) +  H ^i (À|s) - Dz»m (^zm |s, » z1:m-1 )

                                                     i=1
                                                       n

         > Ea» Q» (s, a) +  H »i (À|s)

                                                     i=1

         = V» (s).

However, we have V^ = V which yields a contradiction, proving the claim.

Step 3: dropping the HADF. Consider an arbitrary limit point joint policy » . By Step 2, for any
permutation i1:n, considering the first component of the HU,

»i1 = arg max Es»                    MD(ii11 )V» (s)

           i1 Ui»1 (»i1 )

         = arg max Es» Eai1 i1 Qi»1 s, ai1 -  log i1 ai1 |s                              - Di»1 i1 |s
                                                                                         - Di»1 i1 |s .
             i1 Ui»1 (»i1 )

         = arg max Es» Eai1 i1 Ai»1 s, ai1 -  log i1 ai1 |s

             i1 Ui»1 (»i1 )

Suppose that there exists a policy  = »i1 , and a state s, such that

          = arg max Eai1 i1 Ai»1 s, ai1 -  log i1 ai1 |s ,                                               (30)

                  i1 Ui»1 (»i1 )

implies

         Eai1  Ai»1 (s, ai1 ) -  log  ai1 |s > Eai1 »i1 Ai»1 (s, a) -  log »i1 ai1 |s

which can be written as

         Eai1  Ai»1 (s, ai1 ) + H  Ài1 |s > H »i1 Ài1 |s .

                                                      31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

For any policy i1 , consider the canonical parameterisation i1 (Ài1 |s) = x1, . . . , xm-1,

1-    m-1    xi      , where m is the size of the action space. We have that
      i=1

                                               m

                     Eai1 i1 Ai»1 (s, ai1 ) =       i1 aii1 |s Ai»1  s, aii1
                                                                     s, am i1
                                               i=1

                                                              

                        m-1                         m-1

                     =       xiAi»1 s, aii1 + 1 -        xj  Ai»1

                        i=1                         j=1

                        m-1

                     =       xi Ai»1 s, aii1 - Ai»1 s, am i1  + Ai»1 s, aim1 .

                        i=1

This means that Eai1 i1 Ai»1 (s, ai1 ) is an affine function of i1 (Ài1 |s), and thus, its GÔteaux deriva-
tives are constant in P(A) for fixed directions. Hence, we can obtain that Eai1 i1 Ai»1 (s, ai1 ) +
H i1 Ài1 |s is a strict concave function of i1 (Ài1 |s) (following from the affinity of

Eai1 i1 Ai»1 (s, ai1 ) and the strict concavity of H i1 Ài1 |s ). Therefore, by combining the
Equation 30 and the strict concavity of Eai1 i1 Ai»1 (s, ai1 ) + H i1 Ài1 |s , GÔteaux deriva-
tive of Eai1 i1 Ai»1 (s, ai1 ) + H i1 Ài1 |s , in the direction from » to , is strictly positive.

Furthermore, the GÔteaux derivatives of Di»1 (i1 |s) are zero at i1 (Ài1 |s) = »i1 (Ài1 |s) by its defini-
tion (zero gradient). Hence, the GÔteaux derivative of Eai1 i1 Ai»1 (s, a) + H i1 Ài1 |s -
Di»1 i1 |s is strictly positive. Therefore, for conditional policies ^i1 (Ài1 |s) sufficiently close to
»i1 (Ài1 |s) in the direction towards (Ài1 |s), we have

                     Eai1 ^i1 Ai»1 (s, ai1 ) + H ^i1 Ài1 |s - Di»1 (^i1 |s)                  (31)
                     > Eai1 »i1 Ai»1 (s, ai1 ) + H »i1 Ài1 |s - Di»1 (»i1 |s).

Let us construct a policy ~i1 as follows. For all states y = s, we set ~i1 (Ài1 |y) = »i1 (Ài1 |y).

Moreover, for ~i1 (Ài1 |s) we choose ^i1 (Ài1 |s) as in Inequality 31, sufficiently close to »i1 (Ài1 |s), so

that  ~i1    U i1    »i1 . Then, we have

               » i1

             Es» ,ai1 ~i1 Ai»1 (s, ai1 ) + Es» H ~i1 Ài1 |s - Di»1 (~i1 |s)

             > Es» ,ai1 »i1 Ai»1 (s, ai1 ) + Es» H »i1 Ài1 |s - Di»1 (»i1 |s) ,

which yields a contradiction. Hence, the assumption was false. Thus, we have proved that, for every

state s,

                 »i1 Ài1 |s = arg max Eai1 i1 Ai»1 s, ai1 -  log i1 ai1 |s

                                        i1 Ui»1 (»i1 )

                        = arg max Eai1 i1 Qi»1 s, ai1 -  log i1 ai1 |s .

                            i1 Ui»1 (»i1 )

Step 4: Quantal response equilibrium. We have proved that » satisfies

                     »i Ài|s = arg max Eaii Qi» s, ai -  log i ai|s

                                         i (Ài |s)P (Ai )

                        = arg max Eaii,a-i» -i [Q» (s, a)]

                            i (Ài |s)P (Ai )

                                 n         j aj|s log j aj|s , i  N , s  S.

                        -

                             j=1 aj Aj

Then following the proof of Theorem 1, we have

                     »i ai|s :=      exp   -1Ea-i» -i Q»       s, ai, a-i     a-i)]) .
                                           exp (-1Ea-i» -i    [Q» (s, bi,
                                    bi Ai

                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Thus, » is a quantal response equilibrium. Lastly, this implies that the value function corresponds to
a quantal response value function V QRE, the return corresponds to a quantal response return JQRE.

                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

H EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

H.1 AUTOMATICALLY ADJUSTING TEMPERATURE

We implement an automated temperature tuning method for HASAC which draws on the auto-tuned
temperature extension of SAC (9). Thus, we adjust  with the following objective:

                                J () = EstD,at[- log (at|st) - H»],
where H» is the target entropy.

H.2 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND ADDITIONAL RESULTS

H.2.1 BI-DEXHANDS

Bi-DexHands (2) offers numerous bimanual manipulation tasks that are designed to match various
human skill levels. Building on the Isaac Gym simulator, Bi-DexHands supports running thousands
of environments simultaneously. This increases the number of samples generated in the same time
interval, thus significantly alleviating the sample efficiency problem of on-policy algorithms.

We evaluate HASAC on nine tasks simulating human behaviors across different ages and compare it
with on-policy algorithms HAPPO, MAPPO, PPO, and off-policy algorithms HATD3 and SAC, as
shown in Figure 7. Despite leveraging GPU parallelization, we observe that the sample efficiency
of on-policy algorithms remains significantly lower than that of off-policy algorithms. In the most
challenging Catch Abreast, Two Catch Underarm, and Lift Underarm tasks, on-policy algorithms
fail to learn useful policies within 10m steps. While the off-policy algorithm HATD3 demonstrates
higher sample efficiency compared to on-policy algorithms, it exhibits substantial variance during
training due to the deterministic policies it learned, eventually converging to local optima. In contrast,
our algorithm HASAC outperforms the other five methods by a large margin, showcasing faster
convergence speed and lower variance.

H.2.2 MULTI-AGENT MUJOCO

MuJoCo tasks challenge a robot to learn an optimal way of motion; Multi-Agent MuJoCo (MAMu-
JoCo) models each part of a robot as an independent agent, for example, a leg for a spider or an
arm for a swimmer. With the increasing variety of body parts, improving each agent's exploration
becomes necessary. Although the easier tasks with fewer agents can be solved by a wide range
of different algorithms, the more complex benchmarks, such as the HumanoidStandup 17x1 and
ManyAgentSwimmer 10x2, are difficult to solve with current MARL algorithms.

We compare our method to several algorithms that show the current state-of-the-art performance in
10 tasks of 5 scenarios in MAMuJoCo, including HAPPO, a sequential-update on-policy algorithm;
MAPPO, a simultaneous-update on-policy algorithm; and HATD3 (45), an off-policy algorithm that
outperforms HADDPG and MADDPG. Figure 8 demonstrates that, in all scenarios, HASAC enjoys
superior performance over the three rivals both in terms of reward values and learning speed.

H.2.3 STARCRAFT MULTI-AGENT CHALLENGE

StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) (25) contains a set of StarCraft maps in which a team of
ally units aims to defeat the opponent team. Notably, MAPPO (42), HAPPO, and HATRPO have
demonstrated remarkable performance on this benchmark through the utilization of five influential
factors that significantly impact algorithm performance.

We evaluate our method on four hard maps and four super-hard. Our experimental results, illustrated
in Figure 9, reveal that HASAC achieves over 90% win rates in 7 out of 8 maps and significantly
outperforms other strong baselines in most maps. Notably, in particularly challenging tasks such as
5m_vs_6m, 3s5z_vs_3s5z, and 6h_vs_8z, we observe that HAPPO and HATRPO would converge
towards suboptimal NE. In addition, FOP is unable to learn meaningful joint policy in super-hard
tasks due to its reliance on the IGO assumption. By contrast, HASAC consistently achieves superior
performance and shows the ability to identify higher reward equilibria due to its extensive exploration.
We also observe that HASAC has better stability and higher learning speed across most maps.

                                                          34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                50        ShadowHandCatchAbreast                                        ShadowHandTwoCatchUnderarm                          400            ShadowHandLiftUnderarm

                                                                             20.0                                                                     PPO
                                                                                                                                                      SAC
                40                                                           17.5                                                                     MAPPO
                                                                                                                                            300       HAPPO
                                                                             15.0
                30                                                                                                                                    HATD3
Episode Return                                               Episode Return                                                 Episode Return            HASAC
                                                                             12.5                                                           200

                20                                                           10.0

                10                                                           7.5                                                            100

                                                                             5.0

                0                                                            2.5                                                            0

                     0.0  0.2  0.4 Step 0.6    0.8   11.e07                  0.0   0.0  0.2  0.4 Step 0.6  0.8      11.e07                       0.0       0.2  0.4 Step 0.6   0.8  11.e07

                          (a) Catch Abreast                                        (b) Two Catch Underarm                                             (c) Lift Underarm

                               ShadowHandOver                                         ShadowHandCatchOver2Underarm                                              ShadowHandPen

                30                                                           30                                                             175       PPO
                                                                                                                                                      SAC
                                                                             25                                                                       MAPPO
                25                                                                                                                          150       HAPPO

Episode Return  20                                           Episode Return  20                                             Episode Return  125       HATD3
                                                                                                                                                      HASAC
                                                                                                                                            100
                15                                                           15
                                                                             10                                                             75
                                                                              5
                10                                                                                                                          50

                5                                                                                                                           25

                0                                                            0                                                              0

                     0.0  0.2  0.4 Step 0.6    0.8   11.e07                        0.0  0.2  0.4 Step 0.6  0.8      11.e07                       0.0       0.2  0.4 Step 0.6   0.8  11.e07

                          (d) Hand Over                                        (e) Catch Over2Underarm                                                          (f) Hand Pen

                          ShadowHandDoorCloseInward                                      ShadowHandDoorOpenInward                                     ShadowHandDoorOpenOutward

                                                                             500                                                                      PPO
                                                                             400                                                            500       SAC
                400                                                          300                                                                      MAPPO
                                                                             200                                                                      HAPPO
                                                                             100                                                            400       HATD3

Episode Return  300                                          Episode Return    0                                            Episode Return  300       HASAC

                200                                                                                                                         200

                100                                                                                                                         100

                                                                                                                                            0

                     0.0  0.2  0.4 Step 0.6    0.8   11.e07                        0.0  0.2  0.4 Step 0.6  0.8      11.e07                       0.0  0.2       0.4 Step 0.6   0.8  11.e07

                          (g) Door Close Inward                                         (h) Door Open Inward                                     (i) Door Open Outward

                   Figure 7: Comparisons of average episode return on nine Bi-DexHands tasks.
H.2.4 GOOGLE RESEARCH FOOTBALL

Google Research Football Environment (GRF) contains a set of cooperative multi-agent challenges
in which a team of agents plays a team of bots in various football scenarios. Recent works (42; 45)
have conducted experiments on academic scenarios and achieved nearly 100% winning rate on each
scenario except two very challenging tasks: run pass and shoot with keeper (RPS) and corner. We
apply HASAC to these two academy tasks of GRF, with QMIX and several SOTA methods, including
HAPPO and MAPPO as baselines. Since GRF lacks a global state interface, we propose a solution
to address this limitation by implementing a global state based on agents' observations following
the Simple115StateWrapper of GRF. Concretely, the global state consists of common components
in agents' observations and the concatenation of agent-specific parts and is taken as input by the
centralized critic for value prediction. Additionally, we employ the dense-reward setting. All methods
are trained for 20 million environment steps in the RPS task and for 25 million environment steps in
the corner task.

As shown in Figure 10a and 10b, we generally observe that both MAPPO and HAPPO tend to
converge to a non-optimal NE on the two challenging tasks with a winning rate of approximately
80%. This suboptimal convergence can be attributed to the insufficient level of exploration of these
algorithms. In contrast, HASAC exhibits the ability to attain a higher reward equilibrium by learning
stochastic policies, which effectively enhance exploration and robustness. This finding highlights
the crucial role of stochastic policies in improving exploration, thereby enabling agents to converge
toward a higher reward equilibrium.

H.2.5 MULTI-AGENT PARTICLE ENVIRONMENT

We evaluate HASAC on the Spread, Reference, and Speaker_Listener tasks of the Multi-Agent Particle
Environment (MPE) (19), which were implemented in PettingZoo (31). PettingZoo incorporates

                                                                                             35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

(a) 2x4-Agent Ant          (b) 4x2-Agent Ant          (c) 8x1-Agent Ant

(d) 2x3-Agent HalfCheetah  (e) 3x2-Agent HalfCheetah  (f) 6x1-Agent HalfCheetah

(g) 2x3-Agent Walker       (h) 6x1-Agent Walker       (i) 10x2-Agent Swimmer

(j) 17x1-Agent HumanoidStandup

            Figure 8: Comparisons of average episode return on multiple Multi-Agent MuJoCo tasks.
MPE with some minor adjustments and allows for customizing the number of agents and landmarks,
as well as the global and local rewards. To adapt these tasks to fully cooperative MARL settings,
we sum up the individual rewards of agents to form a joint reward. The results presented in Figure
11 shows that HASAC consistently outperforms the baselines in terms of both average return and
sample efficiency.

H.2.6 LIGHT AIRCRAFT GAME

In addition to the previous three well-established benchmarks, we extend our experiments to include a
novel environment called Light Aircraft Game (LAG) (23). LAG is a recently developed cooperative-
competitive environment for red and blue aircraft games, offering various settings such as single
control, 1v1, and 2v2 scenarios. In the context of multi-agent scenarios, LAG currently supports self-
play only for 2v2 settings. To address this limitation, we introduce a novel cooperative non-weapon
task where two agents collaborate to combat two opponents controlled by the built-in AI. Specifically,
the agents are trained to fly towards the tail of their opponents and maintain a suitable distance.

                                                          36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                                            8m vs 9m                                                    1.0            5m vs 6m                                                                                 3s5z

                       1.0                                                                                                                                                              1.0

                       0.8                                                                              0.8                                                                             0.8

Evaluate winning rate  0.6                                                       Evaluate winning rate  0.6                                                      Evaluate Winning Rate  0.6

                       0.4                                                                              0.4                                                                             0.4                                    FOP

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               QMIX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MAPPO
                       0.2                                                                              0.2                                                                             0.2                                    HAPPO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HATRPO
                                                                                                        0.0                                                                                                                    HASAC
                       0.0                                                                                                                                                              0.0

                            0.0  0.2  0.4 Step 0.6    0.8  11.e07                                            0.0  0.2  0.4 Step 0.6  0.8       11.e07                                        0.0       0.2  0.4 Step 0.6  0.8        11.e07

                             (a) 8m-vs-9m (hard)                                                             (b) 5m-vs-6m (hard)                                                                        (c) 3s5z (hard)

                                           10m vs 11m                                                                          MMM2                                                     1.0                 3s5z vs 3s6z

                       1.0                                                                              1.0                                                                                       FOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                  QMIX
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.8       MAPPO
                       0.8                                                                              0.8                                                                                       HAPPO
Evaluate winning rate                                                            Evaluate Winning Rate                                                           Evaluate winning rate
                       0.6                                                                              0.6                                                                             0.6       HATRPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                  HASAC

                       0.4                                                                              0.4                                                                             0.4

                       0.2                                                                              0.2                                                                             0.2

                       0.0                                                                              0.0                                                                             0.0
                                                                                                            0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 S1t.0e0p 1.25 1.50 1.75 21.0e07
                            0.0  0.2  0.4 Step 0.6    0.8  11.e07                                                                                                                            0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 S1t.0e0p 1.25 1.50 1.75 21.0e07

                           (d) 10m-vs-11m (hard)                                                           (e) MMM2 (super hard)                                                        (f) 3s5z-vs-3s6z (super hard)

                                             corridor                                                                         6h vs 8z

                       1.0                                                                              1.0
                       0.8
Evaluate Winning Rate  0.6                                                       Evaluate winning rate  0.8
                       0.4
                       0.2                                                                              0.6
                       0.0
                                                                                                        0.4                               FOP

                                                                                                                                          QMIX
                                                                                                        0.2                               MAPPO
                                                                                                                                          HAPPO
                                                                                                                                          HATRPO
                                                                                                        0.0                               HASAC

                            0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 S1t.0e0p 1.25 1.50 1.75 21.0e07                              0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 S2t.e0p 2.5 3.0 3.5 41.e07

                            (g) corridor (super hard)                                                        (h) 6h-vs-8z (super hard)

Figure 9: Performance comparison on eight SMAC tasks. We generally observe that HASAC consistently
outperforms other baselines in most tasks, exhibiting higher convergence speed and better stability.

                                 (a) RPS (2 agents)                                                               (b) Corner (11 agents)                                                     (c) Non-weapon (2 agents)

Figure 10: Performance comparison on two GRF tasks and one LAG task. HASAC achieves superior performance
to the other methods.

We compare our method to MAPPO and HAPPO on the cooperative non-weapon task involving
2 agents. Figure 10c demonstrates that HASAC outperforms both MAPPO and HAPPO in terms
of learning speed and stability. Specifically, HASAC exhibits faster convergence and achieves a
higher level of stability throughout the learning process. In contrast, MAPPO and HAPPO exhibit
considerable variability in their performance and display slower learning speeds.

H.3 HYPER-PARAMETER SETTINGS FOR EXPERIMENTS

Before presenting the hyperparameters employed in our experiments, we would like to clarify the
reporting conventions we adhere to. First, we introduce a boolean variable auto_alpha to indicate
whether the temperature is auto-tuned or not. Also, the hyperparameters will only take effect when

                                                                                                                       37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

                               Reference (continuous)                           5      Speaker Listener (continuous)                                        Spread (continuous)

                10                                                              10                                                          60

                20                                                              15                                                          70

Episode Return                                                  Episode Return  20                                          Episode Return  80

                30                                                              25

                40                                                              30                                                          90                                      HATRPO

                                                                                35                                                          100                                     MAPPO
                                                                                                                                                                                    HAPPO
                50                                                              40                                                                                                  HATD3
                                                                                                                                                                                    HASAC
                                                                                45 0                                                        110

                    0  1  2 Episode 3                  4  15e6                         1  2 Episode 3  4              15e6                       0  1  2 Episode 3               4  15e6

                    (a) Reference (continuous)                  (b) Speaker Listener (continuous)                                                   (c) Spread (continuous)

                          Reference (discrete)                                  Speaker Listener (discrete)                                  60        Spread (discrete)
                                                                                                                                             70
                15                                                 10                                                                        80
                                                                                                                                             90
                20                                                              15                                                          100
                                                                                                                                            110
Episode Return  25                                              Episode Return                                              Episode Return  120

                30                                                              20                                                               0

                35

                40                                                              25

                45                                                              30                                                                                                  HATRPO
                                                                                                                                                                                    MAPPO
                50                                                                                                                                                                  HAPPO
                                                                                                                                                                                    HASAC
                55 0
                       1  2 Episode 3                  4  15e6                      0  1  2 Episode 3  4              15e6                          1  2 Episode 3               4  15e6

                      (d) Reference (discrete)                                  (e) Speaker Listener (discrete)                                     (f) Spread (discrete)

                         Figure 11: Comparisons of average episode return on six MPE tasks.

they are used. For instance, the temperature parameter  can be assigned any numerical value, but it
is taken into consideration only when the boolean value auto_alpha is set to False. Similarly, the
target_entropy and alpha_lr are applicable when auto_alpha is set to True.

H.3.1 COMMON HYPER-PARAMETERS ACROSS ALL ENVIRONMENTS

We implement the HASAC based on the HARL framework (45) and employ the existing implemen-
tations of other algorithms, including HATD3, HAPPO, HATRPO, and MAPPO, as described in
the HARL literature. In Google Research Football, we use the results of QMIX in Yu et al. (42).
In StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge, we use the results of FOP in Zhang et al. (44). To ensure
comprehensive evaluation, we conduct training using a minimum of four different random seeds
for each algorithm. Next, we offer the hyperparameters used for HASAC in Table 4 across all
environments, which are kept comparable with the HATD3 for fairness purposes.

Table 4: Common hyperparameters used for off-policy algorithms HASAC and HATD3 across all environments.

                              hyperparameters                                             value        hyperparamerters                               value
                             proper time limits                                           True           warmup steps                                  1e4
                                                                                         ReLU           final activation                              Tanh
                                  activation                                               1e6               polyak                                   0.005
                                  buffer size                                          [256, 256]       update per train                                1
                                 hidden sizes                                              50            target entropy                             -dim(Ai)
                                train interval                                             0.2             noise clip                                  0.5
                                 policy noise                                                           linear lr decay                               False
                          policy update frequency                                           2

H.3.2 BI-DEXHANDS

In the Bi-DexHands domain, for SAC, PPO, MAPPO baselines we adopt the implementation and
tuned hyperparameters reported in the paper (43). And for HAPPO we adopt the implementation and
tuned hyperparameters reported in the HARL paper (45). Here we report the hyperparameters for
HASAC and HATD3 in Table 5 and 6.

H.3.3 MULTI-AGENT MUJOCO (MAMUJOCO)

In this part, we report the hyperparameters used in MAMuJoCo tasks for HASAC and HATD3
in Table 7, 8, 9, and 10. For the other three baselines, we utilize the implementation and tuned
hyperparameters reported in the HARL paper (45).

                                                                                          38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Table 5: Common hyperparameters used for HASAC and HATD3 in the Bi-DexHands domain.

hyperparameters   value     hyperparameters       value       hyperparameters        value
 rollout threads   20            gamma            0.95            batch size         1000
                                 critic lr        5e - 4            n step
     actor lr     5e - 4                          False                               20
 use huber loss   False      use valuenorm                    exploration noise       0.1

Table 6: Different hyperparameters used for HASAC in the Bi-DexHands domain.

               scenarios                          auto alpha     alpha   alpha lr
     ShadowHandCatchAbreast                          True           /     3e - 4
 ShadowHandTwoCatchUnderarm                          False
     ShadowHandLiftUnderarm                          True        5e - 5      /
                                                     True           /     3e - 4
          ShadowHandOver                             True           /     3e - 4
ShadowHandCatchOver2Underarm                         True           /     3e - 4
                                                     True           /     3e - 4
           ShadowHandPen                             True           /     3e - 4
  ShadowHandDoorCloseInward                          True           /     3e - 4
  ShadowHandDoorOpenInward                                          /     3e - 4
 ShadowHandDoorOpenOutward

Table 7: Common hyperparameters used for HASAC and HATD3 in the MAMuJoCo domain.

hyperparameters             value                 hyperparameters   value
 rollout threads             10                     train interval   50
                                                       gamma        0.99
     critic lr              1e - 3                 use valuenorm
 use huber loss             False                                   False

Table 8: Common hyperparameters used for HATD3 in the MAMuJoCo domain.

hyperparameters value hyperparameters value

                  actor lr  5e - 4 exploration noise 0.1

Table 9: Parameter n_step used for HASAC and HATD3 in the MAMuJoCo domain.

          scenarios         value                          scenarios          value
           Ant 2x4            5                       HalfCheetah 2x3          10
           Ant 4x2            5                       HalfCheetah 3x2          10
           Ant 8x1            5                       HalfCheetah 6x1          10
         Walker 2x3          20                                                20
manyagent_swimmer 10x2       10                          Walker 6x1            10
                                                  HumanoidStandup 17x1

Table 10: Different hyperparameters used for HASAC in the MAMuJoCo domain.

          scenarios         actor lr          auto alpha  alpha     alpha lr  batch size
           Ant 2x4          3e - 4               False     0.2          /       2200
           Ant 4x2          3e - 4               False     0.2          /       1000
           Ant 8x1          3e - 4               False     0.2          /       2200
      HalfCheetah 2x3       1e - 3               True       /                   1000
      HalfCheetah 3x2       1e - 3               True       /        3e - 4     1000
      HalfCheetah 6x1       1e - 3               True       /        3e - 4     1000
         Walker 2x3         5e - 4               False     0.2       3e - 4     1000
         Walker 6x1         5e - 4               False     0.2                  1000
manyagent_swimmer 10x2      1e - 3               True       /           /       1000
 HumanoidStandup 17x1       1e - 3               True       /           /       1000
                                                                     3e - 4
                                                                     3e - 4

H.3.4 STARCRAFT MULTI-AGENT CHALLENGE (SMAC)

In the SMAC domain, for MAPPO we adopt the implementation and tuned hyperparameters reported
in the MAPPO paper (42). And for HAPPO and HATRPO we adopt the implementation and tuned

                                              39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Table 11: Common hyperparameters used for HAPPO and MAPPO in the MAMuJoCo domain.

hyperparameters value hyperparameters value

              batch size          4000            network          MLP

              gamma               0.99 hidden sizes [256, 256]

Table 12: Different hyperparameters used for HAPPO and MAPPO in the MAMuJoCo domain.

          scenarios      linear   actor/critic    ppo/critic      clip  actor/critic  entropy
                        lr decay       lr           epoch        param  mini batch      coef
              Ant                                      5                                 0
        HalfCheetah      False       5e - 4           15          0.1        1         0.01
         Walker 2x3      False       5e - 4            5          0.05       1           0
         Walker 6x1       True       1e - 3            5          0.05       2         0.01
manyagent_swimmer 10x2   False       5e - 4            5          0.1        1         0.01
 HumanoidStandup 17x1    False       5e - 4            5          0.2        1           0
                          True       5e - 4                       0.1        1

hyperparameters reported in the HARL paper (45). Here we report the hyperparameters for HASAC
in Table 13 and 14.

Table 13: Common hyperparameters used for HASAC in the SMAC domain.

hyperparameters value hyperparameters value                hyperparameters   value

rollout threads 20              state type        FP             batch size  1000

use huber loss False use valuenorm False use policy active masks true

Table 14: Different hyperparameters used for HASAC in the SMAC domain.

     Map          critic lr  actor lr   gamma     auto     alpha   alpha lr  n step
                                                  alpha
 8m_vs_9m         5e - 4     3e - 4      0.95     True        /     3e - 4     5
 5m_vs_6m         5e - 4     3e - 4      0.95     True        /     3e - 4     20
                  5e - 4     3e - 4      0.99     True        /     3e - 4     20
     3s5z         5e - 4     3e - 4      0.95     True        /     3e - 4     20
10m_vs_11m        5e - 4     3e - 4      0.95     True        /     3e - 4     20
                  5e - 4     3e - 4      0.99     True        /     3e - 4     10
   MMM2           5e - 4     5e - 4      0.99     False    2e - 3              5
3s5z_vs_3s6z      5e - 4     3e - 4      0.99     True        /        /       5
                                                                    3e - 4
   corridor
  6h_vs_8z

H.3.5 GOOGLE RESEARCH FOOTBALL (GRF)

In the GRF domain, for MAPPO and QMIX baselines we adopt the implementation and tuned
hyperparameters reported in the MAPPO paper (42). And for HAPPO we adopt the implementation
and tuned hyperparameters reported in the HARL paper (45). Here we report the hyperparameters for
HASAC in Table 15 and 16.

Table 15: Common hyperparameters used for HASAC in the GRF domain.

hyperparameters   value         hyperparameters   value    hyperparameters   value
 rollout threads   20                gamma        0.99         batch size    1000
                                     critic lr    5e - 4         n step
     actor lr     5e - 4                          False                       10
 use huber loss   False          use valuenorm

Table 16: Different hyperparameters used for HASAC in the GRF domain.

                        scenarios auto alpha alpha alpha lr

                        RPS            False 1e - 4 /

                        Corner         False 1e - 3           /

                                              40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

H.3.6 MULTI-AGENT PARTICLE ENVIRONMENT (MPE)
In this part, we report the hyperparameters for HASAC in Table 17.

Table 17: Hyperparameters used for HASAC in the MPE domain.

hyperparameters    value   hyperparameters        value   hyperparameters    value
 rollout threads    20        batch_size          1000         critic lr     5e - 4
                   0.99         actor lr          5e - 4        n_step
     gamma         True         alpha lr          3e - 4                      20
   auto alpha                                     False
 use huber loss    False    use valuenorm

H.3.7 LIGHT AIRCRAFT GAME (LAG)

In this part, we report the hyperparameters for HASAC in Table 18 and the hyperparameters for
MAPPO and HAPPO in Table 19.

Table 18: Hyperparameters used for HASAC in the LAG domain.

hyperparameters    value   hyperparameters        value   hyperparameters    value
 rollout threads    20        batch_size          1000         critic lr     5e - 4
                   0.99         actor lr          5e - 4        n_step
     gamma         True         alpha lr          3e - 4                      10
   auto alpha

Table 19: Hyperparameters used for MAPPO and HAPPO in the LAG domain.

hyperparameters    value   hyperparameters        value   hyperparameters       value
    batch size     4000     linear lr decay       False     hidden sizes     [256, 256]
                   5e - 4                         0.99         network
  actor/critic lr               gamma                        clip param         MLP
   ppo epoch         5       entropy coef           0                           0.05
  critic epoch       5     actor mini batch         2     critic mini batch
                                                                                  2

                                              41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

I ABLATION STUDY ON SEQUENTIAL UPDATES

In this section, we conduct an ablation study to investigate the effect of sequential updates. We
compare the performance of the original HASAC with sequential update scheme, and HASAC
without sequential updates (or MASAC), which updates each policy according to the following
objective:

Ji (i) = EstD  Eaiti i ,a- t i-o-ildi          log i i  ait|st  -  Qi      ;  st, ati, a-t i  .

                                                                      old

We run the experiments on nine Bi-DexHands tasks. For a fair comparison, we set the hyperparameters
of MASAC to be the same as those of HASAC. Experiments results show that HASAC with sequential
updates consistently achieves better performance.

                  Tasks                            HASAC            MASAC
     ShadowHandCatchAbreast                        45.9(4.3)        36.4(5.2)
 ShadowHandTwoCatchUnderarm                        20.6(1.9)        17.2(1.1)
     ShadowHandLiftUnderarm                       361.0(23.2)      345.0(9.7)
                                                   31.1(0.7)        30.5(1.1)
          ShadowHandOver                           28.7(0.4)        27.0(0.9)
ShadowHandCatchOver2Underarm                      181.5(10.4)      163.8(18.6)
                                                  429.8(16.7)      425.9(7.1)
           ShadowHandPen                          475.6(23.8)      428.8(14.1)
  ShadowHandDoorCloseInward                       542.1(13.1)      528.1(20.4)
  ShadowHandDoorOpenInward
 ShadowHandDoorOpenOutward

Table 20: Averaged final performance on nine Bi-DexHands tasks.

                                              42
